                                              Page 1




              AITP 2022



            Seventh Conference on
Artificial Intelligence and Theorem Proving




          Abstracts of the Talks




     September 4–9, 2022, Aussois, France
                                                                                      Page 2




Preface
This volume contains the abstracts of the talks presented at AITP 2022: Seventh
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Theorem Proving held September 4–9,
2022 in Aussois, France.
    This year AITP has been co-located with a meeting of Working Group 5 of
Cost Action European Research Network on Formal Proofs. We thank Frédéric
Blanqui and the Cost Action CA20111 for covering the local organizer costs for
the events, as well as supporting the travel and accommodation of 16 of the
participants.
    We are organizing AITP because we believe that large-scale semantic process-
ing and strong computer assistance of mathematics and science is our inevitable
future. New combinations of AI and reasoning methods and tools deployed over
large mathematical and scientific corpora will be instrumental to this task. We
hope that the AITP conference will become the forum for discussing how to
get there as soon as possible, and the force driving the progress towards that.
AITP 2022 consists of several sessions discussing connections between modern
AI, ATP, ITP and (formal) mathematics. The sessions are discussion oriented
and based on 30 contributed talks.
    We would like to thank the CNRS conference center in Aussois for host-
ing AITP 2022. Many thanks also to Andrei Voronkov and his EasyChair for
their support with paper reviewing and proceedings creation. The conference
was partly funded from the European Research Council (ERC) under the EU-
H2020 project SMART (no. 714034), and the Czech project AI&Reasoning
CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15003/0000466 and the European Regional Development Fund.
Finally, we are grateful to all the speakers, participants and PC members for their
interest in discussing and pushing forward these exciting topics!

October 2022                                                   Michael Douglas
                                                                 Thomas Hales
                                                               Cezary Kaliszyk
                                                                Stephan Schulz
                                                                   Josef Urban
                                                               Page 3




Program Committee

Ulrich Furbach         University of Koblenz
Thibault Gauthier      Czech Technical University in Prague
Sean Holden            University of Cambridge
Mikoláš Janota         University of Lisbon
Michael Kinyon         University of Denver
Peter Koepke           University of Bonn
Michael Kohlhase       FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg
Konstantin Korovin     The University of Manchester
Ramana Kumar           DeepMind
Adam Pease             Articulate Software
Michael Rawson         TU Wien
Christian Szegedy      Google Research
Sean Welleck           University of Washington
Sarah Winkler          University of Bolzano
Zsolt Zombori          Alfréd Rényi Institute of Mathematics


Additional Reviewers
Jan Hula
Karol Pąk
                                                                         Page 4




Invited Talks
João Araújo
   Forbidden Substructure Theorems

Johannes Brandstetter
   How GNNs and Symmetries can help to solve PDEs

Kevin Buzzard
  Formalizing Fermat

Walter Dean and Alberto Naibo
  Mathematical difficulty, SAT solvers, and bounded arithmetic

Ben Goertzel
   The Role of Automated Theorem-Proving in Neural-Symbolic Approaches
   to Artificial General Intelligence

Michael Rawson
   ML4ATP: What I Wish I Had Known 5 Years Ago

Talia Ringer
   Concrete Problems in Proof Automation

Stephen Wolfram
   Theorem Proving in Metamathematics, the Universe and More
                                                                                                                                Page 5




Table of Contents

Reinforcement Learning for Schedule Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                   8
   Nikolai Antonov, Jan Hůla, Mikoláš Janota, and Přemysl Šůcha

Proving theorems using Incremental Learning and Hindsight Experience
Replay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   E. Aygun, L. Orseau, A. Anand, X. Glorot, S. Mcaleer, V. Firoiu, L. Zhang,
D. Precup and S. Mourad

Project Proposal: Efficient Neural Clause Selection by Weight . . . . . . . . . .                                         24
   Filip Bártek and Martin Suda

A Parallel Corpus of Natural Language and Isabelle Artefacts . . . . . . . . . .                                          28
   Anthony Bordg, Yiannos A. Stathopoulos, and Lawrence C. Paulson

Strategies and Machine Learning for Lash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                          31
   Chad E. Brown, Jan Jakubuv, and Cezary Kaliszyk

Embedding SUMO into Set Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                          34
  Chad Brown, Adam Pease, and Josef Urban

Analyzing Proof Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                  42
  Karel Chvalovský and Josef Urban

Scaling Naproche . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        45
   Adrian De Lon and Peter Koepke

Towards neuro-symbolic conjecturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                       48
   Sólrún Halla Einarsdóttir, Moa Johansson, and Nicholas Smallbone

Program Synthesis from Integer Sequences: Initial Self-Learning Run
on the OEIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   52
   Thibault Gauthier

Project Proposal: Formal Ethics Ontology in SUMO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                    55
   Zarathustra Amadeus Goertzel, Adam Pease, and Josef Urban

LightGBM Hyperparameter Optimization for Clause Classification in
Theorem Proving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
   Zarathustra Amadeus Goertzel, Jan Jakubův, Mikoláš Janota, and Cezary
Kaliszyk

A Corpus for Precise Natural Language Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                 64
   Adrian Groza

LISA: Towards a Foundational Theorem Prover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                 66
   Simon Guilloud , Florian Cassayre, Viktor Kunčak
                                                                                                                              Page 6




Model Discovery for Efficient Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 69
  Jan Hůla and Mikoláš Janota

Selecting Quantifiers for Instantiation in SMT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                         72
    Mikoláš Janota, Jelle Piepenbrock, and Bartosz Piotrowski

Learning plausible and useful conjectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                      75
   Albert Q. Jiang, Wenda Li, and Mateja Jamnik

Exploring Representation of Horn Clauses using GNNs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                    80
   Chencheng Liang, Philipp Rümmer, and Marc Brockschmidt

Using machine learning to detect non-triviality of knots via colorability
of knot diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   84
    Alexei Lisitsa and Alexei Vernitski

Reinforcement Learning in E . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              88
   Jack McKeown and Geoff Sutcliffe

Evolutionary Computation for Program Synthesis in SuSLik . . . . . . . . . . . .                                       91
   Yutaka Nagashima

Project Proposal: Learning Variable Mappings to Repair Programs . . . . . . 94
   Pedro Orvalho, Jelle Piepenbrock, Mikoláš Janota, and Vasco Manquinho

Synthetic Proof Term Data Augmentation for Theorem Proving with
Language Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      99
   Joseph Palermo, Johnny Ye, and Jesse Michael Han

Learning Instantiation in First-Order Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
   Jelle Piepenbrock, Josef Urban, Konstantin Korovin, Miroslav Olšák, Tom
Heskes, and Mikoláš Janota

A small survey of mathematical abilities of modern transformer
architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
   Bartosz Piotrowski

Sifting through a large hypothesis space: Revisiting differentiable
learning through satisfiability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
    Stanislaw J. Purgał, David M. Cerna, and Cezary Kaliszyk

Project proposal: A modular reinforcement learning based automated
theorem prover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
   Boris Shminke

Elements of Reinforcement Learning in Saturation-based Theorem Proving 118
   Martin Suda
                                                                                                                        Page 7




Formal Premise Selection With Language Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
   Szymon Tworkowski, Maciej Mikula, Tomasz Odrzygóźdź, Konrad Czechowski,
Szymon Antoniak, Albert Q. Jiang, Christian Szegedy, Lukasz Kuciński, Piotr
Miloś, and Yuhuai Wu

NaturalProver: Grounded Natural Language Proof Generation with
Language Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
   Sean Welleck, Jiacheng Liu, Ximing Lu, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Yejin Choi
Compressed Combinatory Proof Structures and Blending Goal- with
Axiom-Driven Reasoning: Perspectives for First-Order ATP with
Condensed Detachment and Clausal Tableaux . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
   Christoph Wernhard
Autoformalization for Neural Theorem Proving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
   Yuhuai Wu, Albert Jiang, Wenda Li, Markus N. Rabe, Charles Staats, Mateja
Jamnik, and Christian Szegedy

Tactic Characterizations by the Influences on Proof States . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
   Liao Zhang and Lasse Blaauwbroek
                                                                                                               Page 8




       Reinforcement Learning for Schedule Optimization∗
       Nikolai Antonov13 , Jan Hůla12 , Mikoláš Janota1 , and Přemysl Šůcha1
                   1
                       Czech Technical University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic
                            2
                              University of Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic
                               3
                                 Kazan Federal University, Kazan, Russia


Problem formulation and related work. In this paper we use machine learning to optimize
a specific problem in integer linear algebra, which is practically motivated as job scheduling.
Let us have a machine (system) capable of doing some work divided into a sequence of jobs.
The machine follows three basic assumptions. First, it can do only one job a time. Secondly, a
started job cannot be interrupted: a job must be completed before starting a next one. Third,
the machine cannot idle: having finished one job, it immediately moves onto the next one until
all the jobs assigned to the machine are finished. We are given a set of jobs N = {1, 2, ..., n}
with processing times pi and due dates di for all i ∈ N . We assume that pi and di are positive
integers and pi ≤ di for all i ∈ N . Additionally, each job has a weight (or cost), which is
a positive integer wi , i ∈ N representing how valuable a particular job is. Assume that all
the jobs are available form the very beginning (time moment 0) and executed one by one in
the order specified by a permutation P of N . Let CiP denote the completion time of i-th job
executed according to permutation P and define a set S = {i ∈ N | CiP ≤ di }. The goal is
to find a permutation P ∗ maximizing the weighted number P of jobs that will be completed no
later than the specified due date, i.e. maximize f (P ) = i∈S wi . We formulate the problem in
satisfiability modulo theories (SMT). We want to find an integer vector
                                           (s1 , s2 , ..., sn ) ≥ 0
maximizing                X
                              σ(CiP , di )wi , where σ(x, y) = 1 if x ≤ y else 0
subject to
                       i < j =⇒ (si + pi ≤ sj ) ∨ (sj + pj ≤ si ), i ∈ N, j ∈ N
    The formulation does not explicitly specify that there must not be idling time, because at the
post-processing stage any solution can be easily adjusted to eliminate any idling. In this work,
we use reinforcement learning (RL) to solve this maximization problem, without guaranteeing
optimality—approximate optima are also practically interesting. We remark that a decision
version of the problem is obtained by bounding the objective function by some integer K.
    The problem is proven to be NP-hard [4]—Knapsack is a special case when all jobs have
the same due date. Due to its practical importance, the problem has been studied extensively
in scheduling and OR communities: Potts and Van Wassenhove [6] gave a branch and bound
algorithm for solving instances with up to 1,000 jobs; M’Hallah and Bulfin [5] propose an exact
algorithm capable of handling instances with up to 2,500 jobs; Baptiste et al. [1] developed
an algorithm solving up to 50000 jobs instances of particular type; Hejl et al. [3] investigated
strongly-correlated instances and achieved a progress of solving 5000 jobs within one hour.
    To the best of our knowledge, the considered problem was not studied in the ML community.
However, number of combinatorial optimization problems tackled by reinforcement learning and
other ML approaches is growing every year; we refer the reader to a survey by Bengio et al. [2].
   ∗ Results of this project No. LL1902 were supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports within

the programme ERC CZ
                                                                                                              Page 9

Reinforcement Learning for Schedule Optimization                         Antonov, Hůla, Janota and Šůcha


                                                    J       To process

                           Scheduled

                                                                  Tardy


                       Figure 1: Decision-making of the RL agent for job J


Approach. We solve the considered problem using deep reinforcement learning [8, 7]. A
sketch of the approach is provided in the Figure 1. Initially, all the jobs are sorted in ascending
order by due date. At each moment of time, the agent observes a set of jobs that have not
been completed yet and one of these jobs that the agent has to decide about (the unprocessed
job with the earliest due date). The featurization of the unprocessed jobs is based on the
distribution of their weights/proc. time/due date (represented as histograms). The agent has
two possible actions: (1) schedule the first unprocessed job immediately and therefore it will
be on time; (2) mark the job as tardy and move it to the end of schedule. One step of the
agent corresponds to a decision regarding one job from a given instance. During the training
phase, the agent receives a reward whenever the decision is right, i.e. if the job turned out to
be the same (on time or late) as the agent predicted it to be in the optimal permutation that
we have as a label. During the validation phase, the agent is only rewarded at the very end.
The reward is equal to the ratio of the cost obtained by following the policy to the cost of the
optimal solution.


Evaluation and conclusions. To make a fair comparison with actual results, we generate
data according to the algorithm presented in [1] and [3]. Weights and durations are random  P     in-
tegers from [1; 100] and every due date is random integer from [0.3S; 0.7S], where S = i∈N pi .
We compare to greedy heuristics MAX COST, MAX COST/DUR and MAX COST/DUE,
which process the jobs in ascending order based on wi , ratios wpii , and wdii , respectively. Terms
µ(n) and σ(n) stand for mean and standard deviation of optimality gap, obtained on the in-
                                                       ∗
stances with n jobs. An optimality gap is defined as v v−v
                                                         ∗ , where v
                                                                      ∗
                                                                        is the optimal value of the
instance and v is the cost obtained by following the policy. The results show that our approach
achieves much lower optimality gap than any of the greedy-heuristic approaches. This indicates
that reinforcement learning is a viable approach to optimization of the linear integer algebra
problems studied in this paper. We believe that this work would inspire further research on the
use of reinforcement learning on more general problems or on probabilistic decision procedures.

                                      µ(100)       σ(100)        µ(250)         σ(250)
             MAX COST                 0.14         0.03          0.14           0.02
             MAX COST/DUR             0.09         0.02          0.09           0.01
             MAX COST/DUE             0.09         0.02          0.09           0.01
             DRL model                0.065        0.027         0.015          0.01
                                      µ(500)       σ(500)        µ(1000)        σ(1000)
             MAX COST                 0.14         0.01          0.14           0.01
             MAX COST/DUR             0.08         0.01          0.08           0.01
             MAX COST/DUE             0.09         0.01          0.09           0.01
             DRL model                0.017        0.01          0.009          0.006

2
                                                                                                             Page 10

Reinforcement Learning for Schedule Optimization                        Antonov, Hůla, Janota and Šůcha


References
[1] Philippe Baptiste, Federico Della Croce, Andrea Grosso, and Vincent T’kindt. Sequencing a single
    machine with due dates and deadlines: an ILP-based approach to solve very large instances. J.
    Sched., 13(1):39–47, 2010.
[2] Yoshua Bengio, Andrea Lodi, and Antoine Prouvost. Machine learning for combinatorial optimiza-
    tion: A methodological tour d’horizon. Eur. J. Oper. Res., 290(2):405–421, 2021.
[3] Lukás Hejl, Premysl Sucha, Antonı́n Novák, and Zdenek Hanzálek. Minimizing the weighted number
    of tardy jobs on a single machine: Strongly correlated instances. Eur. J. Oper. Res., 298(2):413–424,
    2022.
[4] Richard M. Karp. Reducibility among combinatorial problems. In Raymond E. Miller and James W.
    Thatcher, editors, Proceedings of a symposium on the Complexity of Computer Computations, held
    March 20-22, 1972, at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, New York,
    USA, The IBM Research Symposia Series, pages 85–103. Plenum Press, New York, 1972.
[5] Rym M’Hallah and R. L. Bulfin. Minimizing the weighted number of tardy jobs on a single machine.
    Eur. J. Oper. Res., 145(1):45–56, 2003.
[6] Chris N. Potts and Luk N. Van Wassenhove. A branch and bound algorithm for the total weighted
    tardiness problem. Oper. Res., 33(2):363–377, 1985.
[7] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
    optimization algorithms. CoRR, abs/1707.06347, 2017.
[8] Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning. Adaptive Computation and
    Machine Learning series. Bradford Books, Cambridge, MA, 2 edition, November 2018.




                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                       Page 11




Proving theorems using Incremental Learning and Hindsight
                    Experience Replay

1     Introduction
The highest performing ATP systems (e.g., [7, 18]) in first order logic have been evolving for
decades and have grown to use an increasing number of manually designed heuristics mixed with
some machine learning, to obtain a large number of search strategies that are tried sequentially
or in parallel. Some recent works [5, 13, 19] build on top of these provers, using modern machine
learning techniques to augment, select or prioritize their already existing heuristics, with some
success. Other recent works do not build on top of other provers, but still require existing proof
examples as input (e.g., [9, 23]). Such machine-learning-based ATP systems can struggle to solve
difficult problems when the training dataset does not provide problems of sufficiently diverse
difficulties.
    In this paper, we propose an approach which can build a strong theorem prover without
relying on existing domain-specific heuristics or on prior input data (in the form of proofs) to
prime the learning. We strive to design a learning methodology for ATP that allows a system to
improve even when there are large gaps in the difficulty of given set of theorems. In particular,
given a set of conjectures without proofs, our system trains itself, based on its own attempts and
(dis)proves an increasing number of conjectures, an approach which can be viewed as a form of
incremental learning. Additionally, all the previous approaches [19, 1, 13] learn exclusively on
successful proof attempts. When no new theorem can be proven, the learner may not be able
to improve anymore and thus the system may not be able to obtain more training data. This
could in principle happen even at the very start of training, if all the theorems available are too
hard. To tackle this challenge, we adapt the idea of hindsight experience replay (HER) [3] to
ATP: Clauses reached during proof attempts (whether successful or not) are turned into goals
in hindsight, producing a large amount of ‘auxiliary’ theorems with proofs of varied difficulties
for the learner, even in principle when no theorem from the original set can be proven initially.
This leads to a smoother learning regime and a constantly improving learner.
    We evaluate our approach on two popular benchmarks: MPTP2078 [2] and M2k [17] and
compare it both with TRAIL [1], a recent machine learning prover as well as with E prover
[24, 7], one of the leading heuristic provers. Our proposed approach substantially outperforms
TRAIL [1] on both datasets, surpasses E in the auto configuration with a 100s time limit, and is
competitive with E in the autoschedule configuration with a 7 days time limit. In addition, our
approach almost always (99.5% of cases) finds shorter proofs than E.


2     Methodology
We describe the two key components of our approach: how we adapt hindsight experience replay
in an incremental learning pipeline, and how clauses are represented for the learner.

Incremental Learning and Hindsight Experience Replay Similar to previous approaches
[19, 13, 1], we use the given clause algorithm [21] where the clause scoring heuristics are replaced
with a neural network. We start with no proof data to start, and train a simple binary classifier
to determine if a particular clause appears in a proof of a conjecture or not. The classifier is
                                                                                                                     Page 12

Proving theorems using Incremental learning and Hindsight Experience Replay


                 Table 1: Number of conjectures proven on MPTP2078 and M2k.

    Domain      Conjectures                Heuristic Approaches                           ML Approaches
                               E-basic   E-auto E auto-schedule        E-best    TRAIL         IL       IL
                               (100s)    (100s)       (100s)          (7 days)              w/o HER w/HER
    MPTP2078        2078         555       1139          1289          1369        1213        1056       1353
    M2k             2003         1451      1845         1911           1923        1808        1688       1861



trained in an incremental manner where the new proof data obtained by the proof attempts is
used to feed the classifier in a continuous manner. The key issue in such an approach arises
if the complete set of conjectures are either very difficult or there are big gaps in difficulty of
given conjectures such that no training data can be generated by proof attempts to train the
classifier. To counter this, we adapt the idea of hindsight experience replay in ATP where any
proof attempt whether successful or failure would generate new data for classifier. The core
idea of HER is to take any “unsuccessful” trajectory in a goal-based task and convert it into
a successful one by treating the final state that happened to be reached as if it were the goal
state, in hindsight. Inspired by HER, we use the clauses generated during any proof attempt
as additional conjectures, which we call hindsight goals, leading to a supply of positive and
negative examples. Let D be any non-input clause generated during the refutation attempt of
Cs . We call D a hindsight goal.1 Then, the set Cs ∪ {¬D} can be refuted. Further, we can use
the ancestors of D as positive examples for the negated conjecture and axioms Cs ∪ {¬D}. This
generates a very large number of examples, allowing us to effectively train the neural network,
even with only a few conjectures at hand.

Representation Our clause scoring network receives as input the clause to score, x, the
hindsight goal clause, g, and a sequence of negated conjecture clauses Cs . Individual clauses
are transformed into a heterogeneous directed acyclic graphs, called clause graph similar to [4].
We use a Transformer encoder architecture [25] for the clause-scoring network, whose input is
composed of the set of node embeddings in the current clause x, goal clause g and conjecture
clauses Cs , up to 128 nodes. For each node, we compute a spectral encoding vector representing
its position in the clause graph [8]; this is given by the eigenvectors of the Laplacian matrix of
the graph. This replaces the traditional positional encoding in transformers.


3      Experiments and Results
We implement our approach on top of E prover but disable all clause scoring heuristics of E. We
use a maximum time of 100s for each proof attempt. We evaluate on two popular benchmarks:
MPTP2078[2] and M2k[17] which are widely used in literature. Further, we compare our results
with E in different configurations as well as incremental learning without hindsight (IL w/o
HER) and TRAIL[1], a recent ML based prover. Table 1 shows the number of proved conjectures
by all provers. IL w/HER not only outperforms TRAIL, IL w/o HER and E (100s) but achieves
a competing performance when E is run for the whole duration of training time. We refer the
reader to the appendix for further details of methodology, experimental setup and additional
results.


   1 Note that, while the original version of HER [3] only uses the last reached state as a single hindsight goal,

we use all intermediate clauses, providing many more data points.


2
                                                                                                   Page 13

Proving theorems using Incremental learning and Hindsight Experience Replay



References
 [1] I. Abdelaziz, M. Crouse, B. Makni, V. Austel, C. Cornelio, S. Ikbal, P. Kapanipathi,
     N. Makondo, K. Srinivas, M. Witbrock, and A. Fokoue. Learning to guide a saturation-
     based theorem prover. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis & Machine Intelligence,
     2022.

 [2] Jesse Alama, Tom Heskes, Daniel Kühlwein, Evgeni Tsivtsivadze, and Josef Urban. Premise
     selection for mathematics by corpus analysis and kernel methods. Journal of Automated
     Reasoning, 52(2):191–213, 2014.

 [3] Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder,
     Bob McGrew, Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight
     experience replay. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30.
     Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.

 [4] Eser Aygün, Zafarali Ahmed, Ankit Anand, Vlad Firoiu, Xavier Glorot, Laurent Orseau,
     Doina Precup, and Shibl Mourad. Learning to prove from synthetic theorems. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2006.11259, 2020.

 [5] Karel Chvalovskỳ, Jan Jakubův, Martin Suda, and Josef Urban. Enigma-ng: efficient neural
     and gradient-boosted inference guidance for e. In International Conference on Automated
     Deduction, pages 197–215. Springer, 2019.

 [6] Maxwell Crouse, Ibrahim Abdelaziz, Bassem Makni, Spencer Whitehead, Cristina Cornelio,
     Pavan Kapanipathi, Kavitha Srinivas, Veronika Thost, Michael Witbrock, and Achille
     Fokoue. A deep reinforcement learning approach to first-order logic theorem proving.
     Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 35(7):6279–6287, 2021.

 [7] Simon Cruanes, Stephan Schulz, and Petar Vukmirović. Faster, Higher, Stronger: E 2.3. In
     TACAS 2019, volume 11716 of LNAI, pages 495–507, April 2019.

 [8] Vijay Prakash Dwivedi and Xavier Bresson. A generalization of transformer networks to
     graphs. CoRR, abs/2012.09699, 2020.

 [9] Zarathustra Amadeus Goertzel. Make E smart again (short paper). In Automated Reasoning,
     pages 408–415. Springer International Publishing, 2020.

[10] Adam Grabowski, Artur Kornilowicz, and Adam Naumowicz. Four decades of mizar.
     Journal of Automated Reasoning, 55(3):191–198, 2015.

[11] Malte Helmert, Tor Lattimore, Levi H. S. Lelis, Laurent Orseau, and Nathan R. Sturtevant.
     Iterative budgeted exponential search. In Proceedings of the 28th International Joint
     Conference on Artificial Intelligence, page 1249–1257. AAAI Press, 2019.

[12] S. Jabbari Arfaee, S. Zilles, and R. C. Holte. Learning heuristic functions for large state
     spaces. Artificial Intelligence, 175(16-17):2075–2098, 2011.

[13] Jan Jakubův, Karel Chvalovskỳ, Miroslav Olšák, Bartosz Piotrowski, Martin Suda, and
     Josef Urban. Enigma anonymous: Symbol-independent inference guiding machine (system
     description). In International Joint Conference on Automated Reasoning, pages 448–463.
     Springer, 2020.

                                                                                              3
                                                                                                   Page 14

Proving theorems using Incremental learning and Hindsight Experience Replay


[14] Jan Jakubův and Josef Urban. Enigma: efficient learning-based inference guiding machine.
     In International Conference on Intelligent Computer Mathematics, pages 292–302. Springer,
     2017.
[15] Jan Jakubův and Josef Urban. Hammering Mizar by Learning Clause Guidance (Short
     Paper). In 10th International Conference on Interactive Theorem Proving (ITP 2019),
     volume 141, pages 34:1–34:8. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2019.
[16] Cezary Kaliszyk and Josef Urban. Learning-assisted theorem proving with millions of
     lemmas. Journal of symbolic computation, 69:109–128, 2015.
[17] Cezary Kaliszyk, Josef Urban, Henryk Michalewski, and Miroslav Olšák. Reinforcement
     learning of theorem proving. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
     volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.
[18] Laura Kovács and Andrei Voronkov. First-order theorem proving and vampire. In Interna-
     tional Conference on Computer Aided Verification, pages 1–35. Springer, 2013.
[19] Sarah Loos, Geoffrey Irving, Christian Szegedy, and Cezary Kaliszyk. Deep network guided
     proof search. In LPAR-21. 21st International Conference on Logic for Programming,
     Artificial Intelligence and Reasoning, volume 46 of EPiC Series in Computing, pages 85–105,
     2017.
[20] Michael Luby, Alistair Sinclair, and David Zuckerman. Optimal speedup of Las Vegas
     algorithms. Inf. Process. Lett., 47(4):173–180, September 1993.

[21] William McCune and Larry Wos. Otter - the CADE-13 competition incarnations. Journal
     of Automated Reasoning, 18(2):211–220, 1997.
[22] Laurent Orseau and Levi H. S. Lelis. Policy-guided heuristic search with guarantees.
     Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 35(14):12382–12390, May
     2021.

[23] Stanislas Polu and Ilya Sutskever. Generative language modeling for automated theorem
     proving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03393, 2020.
[24] Stephan Schulz. E–a brainiac theorem prover. AI Communications, 15(2, 3):111–126, 2002.

[25] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N
     Gomez, L ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in
     Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.




4
                                                                                                         Page 15

Proving theorems using Incremental learning and Hindsight Experience Replay



Appendix

Methodology
we describe the basic search algorithm used by most of the traditional first-order automated
theorem provers, explain how we integrate our method into one of these provers and finally,
provide a detailed description of our overall incremental learning system.


 Given-clause algorithm. Almost all of the powerful automated theorem provers for first-
 order logic, including E, use some variation of a given-clause search algorithm [18, 7, 21]. This
 type of algorithm works by continuously choosing a new given clause to expand, with the help
 of one or more priority queues, until an empty clause (i.e. contradiction) is reached. The given
 clause is combined according to various logical operations (like resolution, factoring, etc.;) with
 previously chosen active clauses to generate more clauses, which are consequently added to the
 priority queues. Each priority queue depends on a scoring function for sorting the clauses. At
 every step, a queue is selected based on a schedule, which usually consists of a simple cycle
 through all queues and each queue occurs for a fixed number of pre-determined steps within
 in each cycle. For example, the simplest schedule could be round robin sampling of all queues
where each cycle consists of a single occurrence of each queue.
     The two most basic types of queues are the FIFO queue and the clause weight queue. The
 former keeps the clauses sorted from oldest to youngest, guaranteeing that every clause will be
visited after some finite amount of time. The latter uses a simple linear function that combines
 the numbers of various elements in the clauses (such as literals, atoms, variables) to obtain a
“weight” and sorts the clauses from lightest to heaviest. The idea is to prioritize lighter or smaller
 clauses which, empirically, helps in reaching the empty clause faster.


Using machine learning to improve provers that depend on the given-clause algo-
rithm. There are many ways to incorporate machine learning into a prover that is based on
the given-clause algorithm. One option is to replace the queues with a policy over clauses that
has full control over the search [6, 1]. Another option is to train a clause scoring function which
merely provides an additional queue that can be added to any existing set of queues [19, 5].


Integrating our method into E. We take the latter approach in this work. We train a
classifier that predicts the probability of a clause appearing in the proof given a set of initial
clauses and use the predictions of this classifier to construct a “learned queue”. We integrate
this queue into the popular open-source first-order prover E using remote procedure calls (in
a fashion similar to Enigma [14]). This allows us to take advantage of the sophisticated logic
engine in E.
    E, however, is more than its logic engine. It comes preloaded with hundreds of thousands
of lines of code for heuristics (optimized for certain datasets) which help E pick the right set
of queues with the right set of ratios for the given problem. As our goal is to replace these
complicated heuristics with a single machine learning system, when we evaluate our method, we
use a simple, fixed queue structure: a FIFO queue for completeness, a basic clause weight queue
for greedy search and a ‘learned’ queue for guided search.

                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                      Page 16

Proving theorems using Incremental learning and Hindsight Experience Replay


Clause-scoring and hindsight experience replay
In order to perform clause-scoring, we use deep neural networks, which can be trained in many
ways so as to find proofs faster. A method utilized by [19] and [15] turns the scoring task into a
classification task: a network is trained to predict whether the clause to be scored will appear in
the proof or not. In other words, the probability predicted by an ‘in-proofness’ classifier is used
as the score. To train, once a proof is found, the clauses that participate in the proof (i.e., the
ancestors of the empty clause) are considered to be positive examples, while all other generated
clauses are taken as negative examples.2 Then, given as input one such generated clause x along
with the input clauses Cs , the network must learn to predict whether x is part of the (found)
proof.
     There are two main drawbacks to this approach. First, if all conjectures are too hard for the
initially unoptimized prover, no proof is found and no positive examples are available, making
supervised learning impossible. Second, since proofs are often small (often a few dozen steps),
only few positive examples are generated. As the number of available conjectures is often small
too, there is far too little data to train a modern high-capacity neural network. Moreover, for
supervised learning to be successful, the conjectures that can be proven must be sufficiently
diverse, so the learner can steadily improve. Unfortunately, there is no guarantee that such a
curriculum is available. If the difficulty suddenly jumps, the learner may be unable to improve
further. These shortcomings arise because the learner only uses successful proofs, and all the
unsuccessful proof attempts are discarded. In particular, the overwhelming majority of the
generated clauses become negative examples, and need to be discarded to maintain a good
balance with the positive examples.
     To leverage the data generated in unsuccessful proof attempts, we adapt the concept of
hindsight experience replay (HER) [3] from goal-conditioned reinforcement learning to theorem
proving. The core idea of HER is to take any “unsuccessful” trajectory in a goal-based task
and convert it into a successful one by treating the final state that happened to be reached as
if it were the goal state, in hindsight. A deep network is then trained with this trajectory, by
contextualizing the policy with this state instead of the original goal. This way, even in the
absence of positive feedback, the network is still able to adapt to the dataset, if not to the goal,
thus having a better chance to reach the goal on future tries.
     Inspired by HER, we use the clauses generated during any proof attempt as additional
conjectures, which we call hindsight goals, leading to a supply of positive and negative examples.
Let D be any non-input clause generated during the refutation attempt of Cs . We call D a
hindsight goal.3 Then, the set Cs ∪ {¬D} can be refuted. Furthermore, once the prover reaches
D starting from Cs ∪ {¬D}, only a few more resolution steps are necessary to reach the empty
clause; that is, there exists a refutation proof of Cs ∪ {¬D} where D is an ancestor of the empty
clause. Hence, we can use the ancestors of D as positive examples for the negated conjecture and
axioms Cs ∪ {¬D}. This generates a very large number of examples, allowing us to effectively
train the neural network, even with only a few conjectures at hand.
     Furthermore, to keep the network small, axioms are not provided as input to the scoring
network Although the set of active clauses is an important factor in determining the usefulness
of a clause, we ignore it in the network input to keep the network size smaller.



    2 These examples are technically not necessarily negative, as they may be part of another proof. But avoiding

these examples during the search still helps the system to attribute more significance to the positive examples.
    3 Note that, while the original version of HER [3] only uses the last reached state as a single hindsight goal,

we use all intermediate clauses, providing many more data points.


6
                                                                                                     Page 17

Proving theorems using Incremental learning and Hindsight Experience Replay


Algorithm 1 Distributed incremental learning. launch starts a new process in parallel. For
each conjecture an instance of UBS decides the sequence of time limits for solving attempts.
def main(conjectures):
 # Launch and connect learners, actors and manager with example buffer &          task queue
  example_buffer = create_example_buffer()
  task_queue = create_task_queue()
  learners = [for i = 1..10:
      launch learner(example_buffer)]
  for i = 1..1000: launch actor(task_queue,
      learners, example_buffer)
  actor_manager = launch actor_manager(conjectures, task_queue)
  wait for actor_manager to finish

def learner(example_buffer):
  repeat forever:
    # Sample a batch of examples and train the network.
    batch = sample_batch_uniformly(example_buffer)
    minimize_classification_loss(batch) # we use cross-entropy

def actor(task_queue, learners, example_buffer)
  repeat forever:
    # Fetch a task and attempt to prove the conjecture.
    conjecture, time_limit = get_task(task_queue)
    learner = sample_uniformly(learners)
    run E on conjecture
        for at most time_limit seconds;
        obtain generated_clauses
    examples = sample_examples(generated_clauses) # see Alg. (*\ref{alg:sample_examples
        }*)
    put_examples(example_buffer, examples)

def actor_manager(conjectures, task_queue):
  schedulers = []
  for conjecture in conjectures:
    schedulers[conjecture] = initialize_UBS() # see Section (*\ref{sec:ubs}*)
  repeat until all conjectures have been proven:
    # Choose a random conjecture and enqueue it.
    conjecture = sample_uniformly(conjectures)
    scheduler = schedulers[conjecture]
    time_limit = get_next_time_limit(scheduler)
    put_task(task_queue, (conjecture, time_limit))




Incremental learning algorithm
Typical supervised learning ATP systems require a set of proofs (provided by other provers) to
optimize their model (e.g., [19, 13, 4]). Success is assessed by cross-validation. In contrast, we
formulate ATP as an incremental learning problem—see in particular [22, 12]. Given a pool
of unproven conjectures, the objective is to prove as many as possible, even using multiple
attempts, and ideally as quickly as possible. Hence, the learning system must bootstrap directly
from initially-unproven conjectures, without any initial supervised training data. Success is

                                                                                                7
                                                                                                         Page 18

Proving theorems using Incremental learning and Hindsight Experience Replay


Algorithm 2 Example sampling algorithm.
def sample_examples(generated_clauses):
  # Estimate the number of examples that can be consumed by the learner
  target_num_examples =
    time_elapsed_since_last_attempt $\times$ target_num_examples_per_second

    # Remove the input clauses
    hindsight_goals =
      generated_clauses \ input_clauses

    # Subsample the goals and the examples
    examples = []
    sizes = {tree_size(c) : c $\in$ hindsight_goals}
    for size in sizes:
      size_goals = {c $\in$ hindsight_goals :
          tree_size(c) == size}
      w_size = 1 / ln(size + e) - 1 / ln(size + e + 1)
      num_examples = ceil(target_num_examples $\times$ w_size)
      for _ in range(num_examples):
        goal = uniform_sample(size_goals) # pick hindsight goal of this size
        anc = ancestors(goal)
        examples += [positive_example(uniform_sample(anc), goal)]
        examples += [negative_example(uniform_sample(hindsight_goals \ anc), goal)]
    return examples




assessed by the number of proven conjectures, and the time spent solving them. Hence, we
do not need to split the set of conjectures into train/test/validate sets because, if the system
overfits to the proofs of a subset of conjectures, it will not be able to prove more conjectures.
    Our incremental learning system is described in Algorithm 1. Initially, all conjectures are
unproven and the clause-scoring network is initialized randomly. At this stage, we have no
information on how long it takes to prove a certain conjecture, or whether it can be proven at
all. The prover attempts to prove all conjectures provided using a scheduler (described below),
so as to vary time limits for each conjecture. This ensures that proofs for easy conjectures are
obtained early, and the resulting positive and negative examples are then used to train the
clause-scoring network. As the network learns, more conjectures can be proven, providing in
turn more data, and so on. This incremental learning algorithm thus allows us to automatically
build a capable prover for a given domain, starting from a basic prover that may not even be
able to prove a single conjecture in the given set.
    Time scheduling. All conjectures are attempted in parallel, each on a CPU. For each
conjecture, we use the uniform budgeted scheduler (UBS) algorithm [11, section 7] to further
simulate running in (pseudo-)parallel the solver with varying time budgets, and restarting each
time the budget is exhausted. In the terminology of UBS, we take T (k, r) = 3r2k−1 in seconds,
but we cap k ≤ kmax = 10. A UBS instance simulates on a single CPU running kmax restarting
programs, by interleaving them: On a ‘virtual’ CPU of index k ∈ {1, . . . , kmax }, a program
corresponds to running the prover for a budget of 3 · 2k−1 seconds before restarting it for the
same budget of time and so on; r is the number of restarts. Hence, as the network learns, each
conjecture is incrementally attempted with time budgets of varying sizes (3s, 6s, 12s, . . . , 3072s),
using no more than one hour, while carefully balancing the cumulative time spent within each

8
                                                                                                                   Page 19

Proving theorems using Incremental learning and Hindsight Experience Replay


budget [20, 11]. Once a proof has been found for a conjecture, the scheduler is not stopped, so
as to continue searching for more (often shorter) proofs.
    Distributed implementation. Our implementation consists of multiple actors running in
parallel, a manager that distributes tasks to the actors using the time scheduling algorithm, and
a task queue that handles manager-actors communication. We used ten learners training ten
separate models to increase the diversity of the search without having to increase the number of
actors. These learners are fed with training examples from the actors and use them to update
their parameters of their clause-scoring networks. Note that during the first 1 000 updates, the
actors do not use the clause-scoring network as its outputs are mostly random.4
    Subsampling hindsight goals and examples. With HER, the number of available
examples is actually far too large: if, after a proof attempt, n clauses have been generated (n
may be in the thousands), not only can each clause be used as a hindsight goal, but there are
about n2 pairs of the form (positive example, hindsight goal), and far more negative examples.
This suddenly puts us in a very data-rich regime, which contrasts with the data scarcity of
learning only from complete proofs of the given conjecture. Hence, we need to subsample the
examples in order to prevent overwhelming the learner. To this end, we first estimate the number
of examples the learner can consume per second before sampling. But there is an additional
difficulty: the number of possible clauses is exponentially large in the tree_size (number of
nodes in the clause tree) of the clause, while small clauses are likely more relevant since the
empty clause (which is the true target) has size 0. Moreover, clauses can be rather large: a
tree_size over 300 is quite common, and we observed some tree_size values over 6 000. To
correct for this, we fix the proportion of positive and negative examples for each hindsight goal
clause size, ensuring that small hindsight goal clauses are favoured, while allowing a diverse
sample of large clauses, using a heavy-tail distribution ws . Finally, all the positive and negative
examples thus sampled are added to the training pool for the learners.

Representation
Our clause scoring network receives as input the clause to score, x, the hindsight goal clause, g,
and a sequence of negated conjecture clauses Cs . Individual clauses are transformed into directed
acyclic graphs (an example is depicted in Figure 1) with five different node types : clause, literal,
atomic-term, variable-term or variable. First, there is a clause node, whose children are literal
nodes, corresponding to all literals of the clause (each one is associated with a predicate). The
children of literal nodes represent the arguments of the predicate; they are either variable-term
nodes if the argument is a variable, or atomic-term nodes otherwise5 . Children of atomic-term
nodes follow the same description. Finally, each variable-term node is linked to a variable node,
which has as many parents as there are instances of the corresponding variable in the clause.
    To each node, we associate a feature vector composed of the following five components: (i)
A one-hot vector of length 3, encoding if the node belongs to x, g or a member of Cs . (ii) A
one-hot vector of length 5 encoding the node type: clause, literal, atomic-term, variable-term
or variable. (iii) A one-hot vector of length 2 encoding if the node belongs to a positive or
negative literal (null vector for clause and variable nodes). (iv) A hash vector representing the
predicate name or the function/constant name respectively for predicate or atomic-term nodes
(null vector for other nodes). (v) A hash vector representing the predicate/function argument
slot in which the term is present (null vector for clause, literal and variable nodes). Hash vectors

   4 We picked 1000 as it appeared to be approximately the number of steps required for the learner to reach the

base prover performance on a few experiments.
   5 A constant argument is equivalent with a function of arity 0.



                                                                                                              9
                                                                                                                    Page 20

Proving theorems using Incremental learning and Hindsight Experience Replay


                                                 ¬p(X) ∨ q(f (X), c)
                                                   goal     clause
                                                   0               0           0
                              ¬p(X)                                                        q(f (X), c)
                                 goal            literal                   goal              literal
                                  −      p             0                   +           q          0
                              X                                                                                 c
                                  goal           v term                                goal            a term
                                  −      0          p@1                               +           c      q@2
                                                       f (X)
                                                           goal                    a term
                                                               +           f         q@1
                                                       X
                                                               goal                v term
                                                               +           0         f @1


                                             goal              variable
                                             0             0           0


Figure 1: Clause graph of a goal clause. Each node has five features: clause type, node type,
literal polarity, symbol hash and argument slot hash. The parts of formula corresponding to
each node are shown outside of the nodes.


are randomly sampled uniformly on the 64 dimensional unit hyper-sphere, using the name of
the predicate, function or constant (and the argument position for slots) as seed.
    The node feature vectors are projected into a 64-dimensional node embedding space using
a linear layer that trains during learning. We use a Transformer encoder architecture [25] for
the clause-scoring network, whose input is composed of the set of node embeddings in the
current clause x, goal clause g and conjecture clauses Cs , up to 128 nodes. For each node, we
compute a spectral encoding vector representing its position in the clause graph [8]; this is
given by the eigenvectors of the Laplacian matrix of the graph from which we keep only the 64
first dimensions, corresponding to the low frequency components. It replaces the traditional
positional encoding of Transformers. Note that if there are more than 128 nodes in the set of
clause graphs, we prioritize x, then g and Cs . Within each graph, we order the nodes from
top to bottom then left to right (e.g. the first nodes to be filtered out would be variable- or
atomic-term nodes of the last conjecture clause). We only keep the transformer encoder output
corresponding to the root node of the target clause and project it, using a linear layer, into a
single logit, representing the probability that x will be used to reach g starting from Cs .


Additional Results
To evaluate our approach, we use two popular benchmarks created out of the larger Mizar
Mathematical Library [10] and used in previous works [6, 17, 16]: MPTP2078 [2] is a sample
of larger Mizar datasets which is a good mixture of hard and easy theorems; M2k [17] is a
relatively easier benchmark which contains theorems that have already been proven by at least
one of the automated theorem provers in the past. The relative hardness of these datasets is
also illustrated by the fact that the state-of-the-art E prover proves less than 70% theorems
in MPTP2078 while it achieves proof rate greater than 95% on M2k theorems. We ignore five
problems in MPTP2078 and 13 problems in M2k due to E failing to generate a conjunctive

10
                                                                                                                       Page 21

Proving theorems using Incremental learning and Hindsight Experience Replay


                                                 200


                                                 150



                                      IL w/HER
                                                 100


                                                  50


                                                   0
                                                       0   50   100   150   200
                                                                 E
Figure 2: Scatter plot of the shortest proof lengths achieved by E vs. incremental learning with
hindsight experience replay on the conjectures that can be proven by both.
normal form (first step in proving) of the problem.
    We evaluate and compare our approach with both machine learning and heuristic based
approaches on these two datasets. We compare our approach with E, considered a state-of-
the-art heuristic based prover, in four configurations: (i) E in its default mode (without any
sophisticated heuristics and scheduling) for 100s (referred to as E-basic), (ii) E in auto mode
for 100s (the mode that was used by [6] and [1] 6 ), (iii) E in auto-schedule mode for 100s (we
observed that the auto-schedule mode significantly outperforms the auto mode), (iv) the best of
different runs of E in auto-schedule mode with time limits of 100s, 1 hour, 1 day and 7 days
(referred to as E-best). We used E prover version 2.5 [7] in each of these configurations with a
memory limit of 8192 GB.
    We ran our incremental learning algorithm with hindsight experience replay (IL w/HER)
for seven days on each dataset, using 1000 actors where each attempt was allowed a maximum
duration of 100s. Every successful attempt that leads to a proof during training is logged,
along with the time elapsed, the number of clauses generated, the length of the proof, and the
proof itself. In order to show the importance of HER in achieving the results above, we ran
the same experiments with incremental learning but without HER (IL w/o HER), by training
the clause-scoring network using solely the data extracted from proofs found for the input
problems. As another point of comparison, we include the results of TRAIL, which is a top
performing learning method built on top of E prover, as reported in [1]. Like our approach,
TRAIL does not rely on E’s heuristics and does not use additional input data from which to
bootstrap, so it is directly comparable. [1] also reported numbers for other learning provers
that are similar in spirit, but since their performance is inferior to TRAIL, we do not include
their reported numbers. We note that there are other machine-learning based theorem provers,
such as ENIGMA [13] and its variants, and [19]; but these provers rely heavily either on E’s
heuristics on or input proof data to bootstrap from, and thus fall in a different category from
ours, where the machine learning system based on a basic prover should bootstrap on its own.

Conjectures proven. Table 1 shows the number of conjectures proven by each of these
approaches as well as the actual number of conjectures in each dataset. According to these
results, IL w/HER significantly outperforms TRAIL on both datasets. Interestingly, since
using HER is orthogonal to the methods used by TRAIL, one could hope that combining both

   6 The exact results reported by [1] for E prover are significantly lower than what we obtained in our experiment.

This could be attributed to a difference in the version of E prover, memory allocated or processor speed—the
exact configuration details are not reported in their paper.


                                                                                                                11
                                                                                                     Page 22

Proving theorems using Incremental learning and Hindsight Experience Replay


Table 2: Problems uniquely solved by one method but not the other (E-best or IL w/HER) on
both datasets.

                          Domain           Only E-best     Only IL w/HER
                          MPTP2078              94                 78
                          M2k                   79                 17


approaches could lead to even better results—but we leave this as future work. IL w/HER proved
2.5 times as many problems as the E-basic on MPTP2078 and 1.28 times as many as E basic
on M2k, improving its performance substantially through the use of a learned clause-scoring
network. IL w/HER also outperforms E-auto as well as E auto-schedule on the MPTP2078
dataset. We do not see a similar improvement on the M2k dataset. This can be due to the
fact that M2k is a subset of theorems already proven by ATPs and hence, by construction, it
consists of the sub-sample of theorems on which E already performs well. Lastly, as IL w/HER
ran for seven days, attempting each conjecture multiple times (though each attempt was allowed
a maximum of 100s) , in order to give E a fair chance, we also ran E for multiple time durations
(100s, 1h, 1d, 7d) and we report the maximum number of conjectures proved in of all these runs
as E-best. Our approach comes very close (less than 1% difference) to the performance of E-best
on the MPTP2078 dataset.

Unique theorems proved by our approach. Additionally, Table 2 shows the number of
theorems proven only by our approach and not E-best, and the other way around.. IL w/HER
manages to prove 78 theorems on MPTP-2078 and 17 theorems on M2k which are not proven
by E-best. This suggests that IL w/HER can find strategies that are absent from E.

Table 3: Comparison of different neural network architectures in IL w/HER on MPTP-2078
and M2k.

             Domain          Conjectures     MLP      GNN      Sequential       Spectral
                                                              transformer     transformer
             MPTP2078            2078         1049     1221        1076          1353
             M2k                 2003         1772     1756        1704          1861



Without hindsight. In order to evaluate specifically the impact of using HER, we also report
the performance of incremental learning alone which does not use any data from unsuccessful
proof attempts. As seen in Table 1, IL w/o HER performed significantly worse, failing to prove
297 (14.3%) of the conjectures on MPTP2078 and 173(8.6%) conjectures on M2k that can be
proven by IL w/HER. Without enough proofs of hard theorems from which to learn, IL w/o
HER underperformed significantly on these domains compared to IL w/HER.

Quality of proofs. We also looked at the individual proofs discovered by both systems.
Incremental learning combined with the revisiting of previously proven conjectures allowed our
system to discover shorter proofs continually. Figure 2 shows a scatter plot of the lengths of the
shortest proofs found by E vs. found by IL w/HER for each theorem. The shortest proofs found
by our system were consistently shorter than those found by E. Out of the 3119 conjectures

12
                                                                                                    Page 23

Proving theorems using Incremental learning and Hindsight Experience Replay


proven by both systems, our proofs were shorter for 3106 conjectures (99.5%) whereas E’s proofs
were shorter for only 8 conjectures, with 5 proofs being of the same length.

Speed of search. E was able to search 13.6 times faster than our provers, in terms of clauses
generated per second. We believe that the only way for our system to compete with E under
these conditions is to find scoring functions that are much stronger than the numerous heuristics
that have been built into E over time.

Comparison between different representations: In order to understand the impact of
the choice of network architecture on the results, we compared different neural networks trained
with the proposed approach. We compared the spectral transformer representation described
in Sec. 2.3 with MLP (based on manually defined features), Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
and a sequential text-based representation of the logical formulae which is used in a standard
sequential transformer. For GNNs, we used the same graph structure as the spectral transformer
described in Sec. 3. An additional root node is added at the top to connect the target clause
with the negated conjecture clauses, in order to allow message passing between different clauses.
Table 3 shows the conjectures solved by using different representations trained with IL w/HER
using 1000 actors. We observe that GNNs outperform MLPs but fall short of the spectral
transformer in our implementation on the MPTP2078 dataset. It should be noted that there
are multiple ways to represent logical formulae as graphs, but we confine ourselves within the
representation which is closest to spectral transformers. A detailed investigation of other graph
representations proposed in the literature in combination with IL w/HER is left for future work.
Also, we observe that spectral transformers outperform sequential transformers significantly
in all our experiments. This can be attributed to the fact that spectral transformers capture
graphical structure, and hence exploit logical invariances in formulae, in contrast to sequential
transformers which treat these formulae as text.




                                                                                              13
                                                                                                           Page 24




                          Project Proposal:
             Efficient Neural Clause Selection by Weight∗
                                Filip Bártek and Martin Suda
                                Czech Technical University in Prague
                                      filip.bartek@cvut.cz



1     Introduction
Saturation-based automated theorem provers (ATPs) that use the given clause algorithm [1]
maintain two sets of clauses during the proof search: processed and unprocessed. In each
iteration of the saturation loop, the prover selects a clause, called the given clause by convention,
from the unprocessed set. All possible inferences are then made between the given clause and
the processed clauses. The newly inferred clauses are added to the unprocessed set, while
the given clause is moved from the unprocessed set to the processed set. When the proof
search successfully concludes (by inferring the empty clause, a trivial contradiction), a subset
of processed clauses constitutes the proof.
    The basic clause selection heuristics choose the clause that is the oldest according to the
time it was inferred, or the smallest in the symbol count, that is, the number of symbol occur-
rences [11]. The symbol count heuristic can be generalized by assigning each symbol a weight
(a positive real number); the clause weight is then calculated by summing the weights of the
symbol occurrences. In addition to that, clauses can be penalized, for example, for each positive
literal, maximal literal, or unorientable equation [10].
    The goal of this project is to improve the standard weight-based clause selection heuristic
by machine learning from proof searches. Specifically, our aim is to find problem-specific values
for the coefficients of the clause weight function (that is, the weights of symbols, variables,
maximal literals, unorientable equations, etc.). These parameter values are to be output from
a neural network (NN) trained on successful proof searches.
    In section 2 we describe in detail our proposed solution in its basic form – a system that
automatically configures the parameters of the clause weight function in a problem-specific
fashion. In section 3 we outline possible generalizations and modifications.


2     GNN-based clause selection
Prediction When a new problem is to be solved, the problem is processed with a graph
neural network (GNN) [13, 8, 4, 9]. The GNN produces a weight wf for each symbol f and a
common weight wX for all variables. The weights are then used to instantiate a weight-based
clause selection heuristic: The weight of a clause is computed as the sum of the weights of all
the symbol and variable occurrences in the clause.
    Note that our GNN only needs to be evaluated once at the beginning of the proof search:
Once the symbol and variable weights are calculated, they can be used throughout the proof
search without any additional input from the GNN. This can be interpreted as a conservative

  ∗ This work is supported by the Czech Science Foundation project no. 20-06390Y (JUNIOR grant), and the

Grant Agency of the Czech Technical University in Prague, grant no. SGS20/215/OHK3/3T/37.
                                                                                                          Page 25

Efficient Neural Clause Selection by Weight                                            Bártek and Suda


modification of the standard clause selection heuristic: We introduce neural guidance into the
proof search without increasing the cost of computing the weight of a newly inferred clause. This
contrasts with neural proof guidance systems that process each clause considered for selection
with a NN, such as ENIGMA Anonymous [5] or the prototype extension of E by Loos et al. [7].

Training The GNN is trained on successful proof searches. Similarly to ENIGMA [5], our
GNN is trained so that the clause selection heuristic favors clauses that have been observed to
contribute to a proof. Using a GNN that does not have access to symbol names, we train a
signature-agnostic system.
    Each training example consists of an input problem, a proof clause c+ , and a non-proof
clause c− . The loss function ℓ is defined so that it is monotone with respect to the weight of
the proof clause w(c+ ) and anti-monotone with respect to the weight of the non-proof clause
w(c− ). Additional penalty terms, scaled by hyperparameters λf and λX , ensure that the symbol
weights wfi and the variable weight wX do not drift far from the standard value 1. The loss of
the proof clause c+ and the non-proof clause c− in a problem with symbols f1 , . . . , fn is:
                                                                n
                                                             1X
         ℓ(c+ , c− ) = − log sigmoid(w(c− ) − w(c+ )) + λf         (log wfi )2 + λX (log wX )2     (1)
                                                             n i=1

This loss design is inspired by the approach that we successfully applied to symbol precedence
recommendation [2].
   Training examples will be collected by running the target ATP Vampire [6] on problems
randomly sampled from the TPTP problem library [12].


3     Possible modifications
Additional input features The clause weight function may include additional clause fea-
tures available in the prover, namely clause derivation depth and size. These clause features
may be multiplied by coefficients predicted by the GNN to make the influence of the features
trainable. In a similar fashion, the weights of terms, atoms, and literals may be augmented by
term-ordering-aware features [11], namely literal maximality in the clause, term maximality in
an equation, and orientability of an equation.

Binary cross-entropy loss A straightforward alternative to the loss function defined above
(1) is provided by training a binary clause classifier that predicts whether an input clause is
non-proof. If we allow the symbol and variable weights to span all real numbers, we can train
the NN using the standard binary cross-entropy loss, which allows extracting a prediction of
probability of the input clause classifying as non-proof. Ranking the clauses by this probability
prioritizes the inference of clauses that are likely to contribute to the proof. Although allowing
negative term weights forfeits fairness of the clause selection, this can be salvaged (as is anyway
done in the typical clause selection setup) by alternating weight-based and age-based clause
section under some ratio.

Recursive neural network Without increasing the asymptotic computational cost of the
evaluation of the clause weight, we can train a recursive neural network (RNN) for the clause
syntax directed acyclic graph (dag) [3]. Depending on the complexity of the RNN, this can
significantly increase the computational cost of evaluating the weight of a clause. The RNN
may use a GNN to calculate the initial embeddings of the symbols and variables.

2
                                                                                                   Page 26

Efficient Neural Clause Selection by Weight                                     Bártek and Suda


References
 [1] Leo Bachmair and Harald Ganzinger. Resolution theorem proving. In John Alan Robinson
     and Andrei Voronkov, editors, Handbook of Automated Reasoning (in 2 volumes), pages
     19–99. Elsevier and MIT Press, 2001. ISBN 0-444-50813-9. doi:10.1016/b978-044450813-
     3/50004-7.
 [2] Filip Bártek and Martin Suda. Neural precedence recommender. In André Platzer and
     Geoff Sutcliffe, editors, Automated Deduction - CADE 28 - 28th International Conference
     on Automated Deduction, Virtual Event, July 12-15, 2021, Proceedings, volume 12699 of
     Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 525–542. Springer, 2021. ISBN 978-3-030-79875-
     8. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-79876-5 30.
 [3] Karel Chvalovský. Top-down neural model for formulae. In 7th International Confer-
     ence on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019.
     OpenReview.net, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Byg5QhR5FQ.
 [4] Xavier Glorot, Ankit Anand, Eser Aygün, Shibl Mourad, Pushmeet Kohli, and Doina Pre-
     cup. Learning representations of logical formulae using graph neural networks. In Work-
     shop on Graph Representation Learning at 33rd Neural Information Processing Systems
     (NeurIPS 2019), 2019. URL https://grlearning.github.io/papers/58.pdf.
 [5] Jan Jakubuv, Karel Chvalovský, Miroslav Olšák, Bartosz Piotrowski, Martin Suda, and
     Josef Urban. ENIGMA Anonymous: Symbol-independent inference guiding machine (sys-
     tem description). In Nicolas Peltier and Viorica Sofronie-Stokkermans, editors, Automated
     Reasoning - 10th International Joint Conference, IJCAR 2020, Paris, France, July 1-4,
     2020, Proceedings, Part II, volume 12167 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
     448–463. Springer, 2020. ISBN 978-3-030-51053-4. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-51054-1 29.
 [6] Laura Kovács and Andrei Voronkov. First-order theorem proving and Vampire. In Natasha
     Sharygina and Helmut Veith, editors, Computer Aided Verification - 25th International
     Conference, CAV 2013, Saint Petersburg, Russia, July 13-19, 2013. Proceedings, volume
     8044 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 1–35. Springer, 2013. ISBN 978-3-642-
     39798-1. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-39799-8 1.
 [7] Sarah M. Loos, Geoffrey Irving, Christian Szegedy, and Cezary Kaliszyk. Deep network
     guided proof search. In Thomas Eiter and David Sands, editors, LPAR-21, 21st Interna-
     tional Conference on Logic for Programming, Artificial Intelligence and Reasoning, Maun,
     Botswana, May 7-12, 2017, volume 46 of EPiC Series in Computing, pages 85–105. Easy-
     Chair, 2017. doi:10.29007/8mwc.
 [8] Miroslav Olšák, Cezary Kaliszyk, and Josef Urban. Property invariant embedding for au-
     tomated reasoning. In Giuseppe De Giacomo, Alejandro Catalá, Bistra Dilkina, Michela
     Milano, Senén Barro, Alberto Bugarı́n, and Jérôme Lang, editors, ECAI 2020 - 24th Euro-
     pean Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 29 August-8 September 2020, Santiago de Com-
     postela, Spain, August 29 - September 8, 2020 - Including 10th Conference on Prestigious
     Applications of Artificial Intelligence (PAIS 2020), volume 325 of Frontiers in Artificial
     Intelligence and Applications, pages 1395–1402. IOS Press, 2020. ISBN 978-1-64368-100-9.
     doi:10.3233/FAIA200244.
 [9] Michael Rawson and Giles Reger. Directed graph networks for logical reasoning (extended
     abstract). In Pascal Fontaine, Konstantin Korovin, Ilias S. Kotsireas, Philipp Rümmer,

                                                                                              3
                                                                                                   Page 27

Efficient Neural Clause Selection by Weight                                     Bártek and Suda


     and Sophie Tourret, editors, Joint Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Practical Aspects of
     Automated Reasoning (PAAR) and the 5th Satisfiability Checking and Symbolic Computa-
     tion Workshop (SC-Square) Workshop, 2020 co-located with the 10th International Joint
     Conference on Automated Reasoning (IJCAR 2020), Paris, France, June-July, 2020 (Vir-
     tual), volume 2752 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings, pages 109–119. CEUR-WS.org, 2020.
     URL http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2752/paper8.pdf.
[10] Stephan Schulz. E 2.4 User Manual, 2020. URL https://easychair.org/publications/
     preprint/8dss.
[11] Stephan Schulz and Martin Möhrmann. Performance of clause selection heuristics for
     saturation-based theorem proving. In Nicola Olivetti and Ashish Tiwari, editors, Auto-
     mated Reasoning - 8th International Joint Conference, IJCAR 2016, Coimbra, Portugal,
     June 27 - July 2, 2016, Proceedings, volume 9706 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
     pages 330–345. Springer, 2016. ISBN 978-3-319-40228-4. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-40229-1 23.
[12] Geoff Sutcliffe. The TPTP problem library and associated infrastructure. Journal of
     Automated Reasoning, 59(4), December 2017. ISSN 0168-7433. doi:10.1007/s10817-017-
     9407-7.
[13] Jie Zhou, Ganqu Cui, Shengding Hu, Zhengyan Zhang, Cheng Yang, Zhiyuan Liu, Lifeng
     Wang, Changcheng Li, and Maosong Sun. Graph neural networks: A review of methods
     and applications. AI Open, 1:57–81, 2020. doi:10.1016/j.aiopen.2021.01.001.




4
                                                                                                             Page 28




      A Parallel Corpus of Natural Language and Isabelle
                           Artefacts
       Anthony Bordg∗, Yiannos A. Stathopoulos†, and Lawrence C. Paulson‡
          Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, UK
                              [apdb3,yas23,lp15]@cam.ac.uk

    Parallel corpora are key resources for machine translation in natural language processing
(NLP). A parallel corpus maps textual scripts in one language (e.g., French) to their equivalents
in another language (e.g., English). The language-paired scripts in a parallel corpus are data
points used to train language models that learn how to translate text from one language to the
other.
    Recently, the theorem proving community explored autoformalisation – the task of generat-
ing formal proofs that can be recognised by a theorem prover from their counterparts expressed
in informal natural language – as an instance of machine translation [1, 2]. Large transformer
models, such as Codex [3], have demonstrated that machines can learn to generate code from
natural language text through the use of large (parallel) corpora.
    We introduce the Isabelle Parallel Corpus (IPC) of natural language and Isabelle/HOL
proofs. Natural language proofs in our corpus are expressed using sentences in the natu-
ral language of mathematics, with mathematical expressions transcribed using LATEX. The
aforementioned textual proofs have been extracted from textbooks, International Olympiad of
Mathematics solution sheets and other real-world mathematics resources.
    In this presentation we will describe our multi-stage approach for constructing our corpus,
showcase our annotation tools and discuss the challenges involved in designing the annotation
scheme of a parallel corpus linking natural language to formal proofs.
    We developed an annotation tool that allows us to (a) record information about artefacts in
the corpus, (b) collect parallel natural language and Isabelle/Isar scripts and (c) implement the
annotation scheme for the IPC. Our tool is built on top of a special instance of the SErAPIS
search engine for Isabelle and supports multi-user annotation.
    In the first phase of building our corpus we have sourced over 500 Isabelle artefacts, including
theorems, definitions, lemmata and proof scripts. For each artefact we record information that
includes a statement of each artefact in the natural language of mathematics typeset in LATEX,
a BibTEX citation to the source material (textbooks, journal etc), the page and number (e.g.,
Theorem 4.1) as they appear in the source material. The second phase, which is ongoing,
involves attaching informal and formal Isabelle/Isar proofs to the recorded statements. At the
time of writing, we have paired Isabelle/Isar proofs with corresponding informal proofs for 18
statements.
    The consensus in NLP is that machine translation models benefit from word and sentence
alignments [4, 5]. A sentence alignment for two parallel text scripts in different languages is
a pairing that links sentences in one language to sentences in the other language. Similarly, a
word alignment links tokens from a script in one language to the tokens of its equivalent script
in the other language. The parallel corpus designers are responsible for including annotations
  ∗ Anthony Bordg thanks Manuel Eberl for sharing his knowledge of the Archive of Formal Proofs’ contents.
   † Yiannos Stathopoulos thanks Sean Holden and Albert Qiaochu Jiang for discussing the corpus with the

authors.
   ‡ The authors were supported by the ERC Advanced Grant ALEXANDRIA (Project 742178) funded by the

European Research Council and led by Professor Lawrence Paulson at the University of Cambridge, UK.
                                                                                                     Page 29

A Parallel Corpus of Natural Language and Isabelle Artefacts                Bordg and Stathopoulos


for sentence and word alignments if this information is required by the intended use of the
corpus.
    However, without answering questions like “Does every sentence in a natural language proof
correspond to a statement in Isabelle/Isar?” and “Can one Isabelle/Isar statement account for
multiple natural language sentences?”, the nature of sentence and word alignments for a parallel
corpus like the IPC is unclear.
    Therefore, the first challenge in designing the IPC is to identify the annotation require-
ments of the corpus for aligning natural language sentences to Isabelle/Isar statements. We
conducted a pilot study to determine the requirements of such an annotation and made some
observations, including:

    1. there are sentences in the natural language that do not correspond to any statement in
       Isabelle/Isar and vice-versa and this occurs, for example, when the source text and the
       Isabelle formalisation assume different prerequisites;
    2. there is a many-to-many mapping (i.e. not a perfect one-to-one correspondence) be-
       tween facts within the textual proof of a statement and facts within the corresponding
       Isabelle/Isar proof script;
    3. it sometimes happens that results embedded in Isabelle proofs are not factorised as lem-
       mata, which could be possibly useful results on their own, but this phenomenon does not
       occur in natural language proofs since one can always refer to a result even if it is not
       explicitly factorised;
    4. both textual and formal proofs may import dependencies in their argumentation. Depen-
       dencies in Isabelle/Isar proofs may span multiple theory files.

    Our observations give rise to the second challenge in designing IPC: how should depen-
dencies in parallel textual and Isabelle/Isar proofs be incorporated in the corpus? One solution
would be to integrate dependencies in the corpus and include data about the reference graph
between artefacts [6].
    Unlike general-purpose natural language, the language of mathematics follows its own con-
ventions and is interspersed with mathematical expressions [7]. Similarly, proofs in the Is-
abelle/Isar language are structured and include statements with terms representing assumptions
and symbolic reasoning. Therefore, the third challenge is designing a suitable annotation
scheme for (a) representing Isabelle/Isar terms and mathematical expressions in textual proofs
and (b) establishing an alignment between them. Attractive solutions come from Mathematical
Knowledge Management (MKM) and code understanding and generation. For instance, math-
ematical expressions and terms can be encoded using Presentation and Content MathML [8].
Furthermore, we can overlay our corpus with token type and other information, such as identi-
fier tagging (IT), that will allow researchers to implement masked span/identifier prediction[9]
and skip-tree training [10] in models trained with our corpus. We envisage that the third phase
of our process will address these challenges and introduce sentence and token alignments to the
IPC.
    The IPC will be made public on GitHub prior to our presentation in the hope that phase 2
material (data linking natural language proofs to their Isabelle/Isar counterparts) will be useful
to researchers in machine learning for theorem proving. We intend to continuously update the
corpus (e.g. with sentence and token alignments in phase 3) and this strategy reflects our vision
that the IPC is a living corpus with standardised releases to facilitate comparative analysis of
machine learning models. We also intend to open our annotation tools to the wider community
and we invite all Isabelle users to join in the annotation effort to continuously expand the IPC.

2
                                                                                                          Page 30

A Parallel Corpus of Natural Language and Isabelle Artefacts                    Bordg and Stathopoulos


References
 [1] Christian Szegedy. A promising path towards autoformalization and general artificial intelligence.
     In Christoph Benzmüller and Bruce Miller, editors, Intelligent Computer Mathematics, pages 3–20,
     Cham, 2020. Springer International Publishing.
 [2] Qingxiang Wang, Chad Brown, Cezary Kaliszyk, and Josef Urban. Exploration of neural machine
     translation in autoformalization of mathematics in mizar. In Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGPLAN
     International Conference on Certified Programs and Proofs. ACM, jan 2020.
 [3] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
     Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
     Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
     Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
     Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fo-
     tios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex
     Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saun-
     ders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa,
     Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob
     McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating
     large language models trained on code. 2021.
 [4] Philipp Koehn. Statistical Machine Translation. Cambridge University Press, USA, 1st edition,
     2010.
 [5] Dan Jurafsky and James H. Martin. Speech and language processing : an introduction to natural
     language processing, computational linguistics, and speech recognition. Pearson Prentice Hall,
     Upper Saddle River, N.J., 2009.
 [6] Sean Welleck, Jiacheng Liu, Ronan Le Bras, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Yejin Choi, and Kyunghyun
     Cho. Naturalproofs: Mathematical theorem proving in natural language, 2021.
 [7] Mohan Ganesalingam. The Language of Mathematics. PhD thesis, Cambridge University Com-
     puter Laboratory, 2008.
 [8] Minh-Quoc Nghiem, Giovanni Yoko Kristianto, Goran Topić, and Akiko Aizawa. Which one is
     better: Presentation-based or content-based math search? In Stephen M. Watt, James H. Dav-
     enport, Alan P. Sexton, Petr Sojka, and Josef Urban, editors, Intelligent Computer Mathematics,
     pages 200–212, Cham, 2014. Springer International Publishing.
 [9] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena,
     Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified
     text-to-text transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(140):1–67, 2020.
[10] Markus Norman Rabe, Dennis Lee, Kshitij Bansal, and Christian Szegedy. Mathematical reasoning
     via self-supervised skip-tree training. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
     2021.




                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                     Page 31




              Strategies and Machine Learning for Lash
              Chad E. Brown1 , Jan Jakubuv1,2 , and Cezary Kaliszyk2
                         1
                             Czech Technical University in Prague, Czechia
                                 2
                                   University of Innsbruck, Austria



    Lash [BK22] is an automated theorem prover for higher-order logic. Lash is a fork of
the theorem prover Satallax [Bro12; FB16]. Lash replaces Satallax’s Ocaml representation of
terms with an efficient representation of normal terms (with unique integer ids) in C. The
representation in C also stores useful information such as which de Bruijn indices are free in
the term. Knowing the free de Bruijn indices of terms makes recognizing potential η-redexes
possible without traversing the λ-abstraction. Likewise it is possible to determine when shifting
and substitution of de Bruijn indices would not affect a term, avoiding the need to traverse the
term. Computations such as substitutions and shifting de Bruijn indices are cached to prevent
recomputation.
    In addition to the low-level C term reimplementation, we have also provided a number
of other low-level functionalities replacing the slower parts of the Ocaml code. This includes
low-level priority queues, as well as C code used to associate the integers representing normal
propositions with integers that are used to communicate with MiniSat.
    As with Satallax, the nature of Lash’s search is highly dependent on the settings of boolean
and integer flags. A mode (also called a strategy) is a collection of flag settings. A schedule is
a sequence of modes, along with a timeout. A few of the important flags include:
   • Initial Subterms As Instantiations is a boolean flag. If set to true, Lash uses closed
     subterms of the initial problem as instantiations.
   • Eagerly Process Instantiations is a boolean flag. If set to true, new instantiations
     are processed immediately instead of being put onto the priority queue.
   • Split Global Disjunctions is a boolean flag. If set to true, Lash tries to split the
     problem into several subproblems to be proven independently before beginning the search.
   • Minisat Search Period is an integer flag that controls how often Minisat is asked to
     search for a model of the current set of propositional clauses. Sometimes this is set to
     a low number, e.g., 10, so that Minisat checks for unsatisfiability after every tenth step.
     Often it is useful to set the flag to a very high number, e.g., a billion, so that Lash
     will effectively not ask Minisat to check for unsatisfiability, unless all other options are
     exhausted. (In many problems Minisat determines unsatisfiability via unit propagation
     without decisions.)
   • Enum Start is an integer flag that determines how long to delay beginning enumeration
     of instantiations for quantifiers at function types. If a problem has a higher-order quan-
     tifier that is irrelevant to the problem, then a high value is helpful (since no higher-order
     instantiation is needed). If the problem requires instantiating a higher-order quantifier,
     then a lower value is more likely to lead to success.
   • Axiom Delay is an integer flag that (if nonzero) nudges Lash to work on the negated
     conjecture before working on the axioms, with larger integers corresponding to longer
     delays.
                                                                                                     Page 32

Strategies and Machine Learning for Lash                              Brown, Jakubuv, and Kaliszyk


Following Satallax, Lash reads a problem and determines if it exceeds a certain size thresh-
old, classifying problems as “small” or “large.” For large problems an implementation of
SInE [HV11] reduces the size of the problem and then searches using a schedule appropri-
ate for large problems. For small problems a search proceeds using a schedule appropriate for
small problems. Which modes and schedules are appropriate for which kinds of problems is
determined experimentally.
    Starting with several manually designed strategies (i.e., modes) and we use the strategy
invention system Grackle1 to invent more strategies targeted to randomly selected 1800 TPTP
THF problems. Grackle is a generalization of strategy invention system BliStr [Urb13].
Both systems are based an evolutionary algorithm, where strategies are considered “animals”
and problems to be solved their “food”. Only animals that consume enough food, that is,
solve enough problems, survive to the next generation and are given a chance to conceive an
offspring. This algorithm favors animals that consume food not consumed by others. This leads
to diversity and complementarity of invented strategies.
    While BliStr is a strategy invention system for E Prover, Grackle can be instantiated
to invent strategies for any solver. A requisite of this instantiation is a parametrization of the
solver configuration space, in our case, the collection of Lash mode flags. We start by extracting
flag names and possible option values from the collection of manually designed modes. This
gives us 130 flag names. Out of them, 43 correspond to boolean options. The rest are integer
options, with domains ranging in size from 2 to 26. Altogether, the space contains around 1060
possible configurations.
    Once the configurations space is parametrized, we can launch Grackle with 10 initial
configurations, selected from the manually designed strategies as the most complementary and
strongest ones. During the strategy invention, configurations are evaluated with a short runtime
limit of 1 second. The best of the initial strategies solves 285 problems (out of 1800 TPTP
problems) in 1 second. Together, the 10 initial strategies solve 358 problems.
    We limit Grackle runs to 24 hours to be able to evaluate several strategy invention options.
We try different settings for maximal strategy generation size, and several variations of strategy
specialization used to produce offspring. Together we run around 14 Grackle runs, each
running on 8 CPU cores. All the runs produce more than 3000 different modes, the best of
them solves 355 problems in 1 second. The greedy collection of 10 best new modes solves
together 449 problems, and the total coverage of all the modes is 489.
    We construct a Lash schedule by evaluating best 110 strategies on the training problems
in 30 seconds. From this evaluation, we construct a greedy cover of 10 best strategies. This
greedy cover gives us an order in which to run the modes, provided the overall time limit is
evenly distributed among the modes. Additionally, we construct a schedule with 20 modes,
extending the first 10 with another greedy cover constructed without the previously selected
modes. Furthermore, we can also split the results of the evaluation into results on “small” and
“large” problems, and we can construct two different schedules for them.
    We are investigating the possible ways how machine learning can be included in Lash.
In particular, this could involve the extension of the shared C representation by precomputing
various features useful for prioritizing the available actions [FB16]. Other ways to apply machine
learning include the selection or even generation of interesting instances for a given problem,
as well as machine-learning guided interaction with the SAT-solver.
Acknowledgements The results were supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth and
Sports within the dedicated program ERC CZ under the project POSTMAN no. LL1902 and
the ERC starting grant no. 714034 SMART.
    1 https://github.com/ai4reason/grackle



2
                                                                                                 Page 33

Strategies and Machine Learning for Lash                          Brown, Jakubuv, and Kaliszyk


References
[BK22]    C. E. Brown and C. Kaliszyk. “Lash 1.0 (System Description)”. In: accepted for
          publication at IJCAR 2022. 2022.
[Bro12]   C. E. Brown. “Satallax: An Automatic Higher-Order Prover”. In: IJCAR. Ed. by B.
          Gramlich, D. Miller, and U. Sattler. Vol. 7364. LNCS. Springer, 2012, pp. 111–117.
[FB16]    M. Färber and C. E. Brown. “Internal Guidance for Satallax”. In: Automated Rea-
          soning - 8th International Joint Conference, IJCAR 2016. Ed. by N. Olivetti and A.
          Tiwari. Vol. 9706. LNCS. Springer, 2016, pp. 349–361. url: https://doi.org/10.
          1007/978-3-319-40229-1\_24.
[HV11]    K. Hoder and A. Voronkov. “Sine Qua Non for Large Theory Reasoning”. In: 23rd
          International Conference Automated Deduction - CADE-23. Ed. by N. S. Bjørner
          and V. Sofronie-Stokkermans. Vol. 6803. LNCS. Springer, 2011, pp. 299–314. doi:
          10.1007/978-3-642-22438-6\_23. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-
          22438-6\_23.
[Urb13]   J. Urban. “BliStr: The Blind Strategymaker”. In: CoRR abs/1301.2683 (2013). arXiv:
          1301.2683. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1301.2683.




                                                                                            3
                                                                                                         Page 34




                   Embedding SUMO into Set Theory ∗
                     Chad Brown1 , Adam Pease2 , and Josef Urban1
                      1
                          Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic
                              2
                                Articulate Software, San Jose, CA, USA

    The Suggested Upper Merged Ontology (SUMO) [13, 14] is a comprehensive ontology of
around 20,000 concepts and 80,000 hand-authored logical statements in a higher-order logic,
that has an associated integrated development environment called Sigma [16]1 that interfaces to
leading theorem provers such as Eprover [19] and Vampire [12]. In previous work on translating
SUMO to THF [2] a syntactic translation to THF was created but did not resolve many aspects
of the intended higher order semantics of SUMO. It is our objective in our current efforts to
lay the groundwork for a new translation to TH0, based on expressing SUMO in set theory.
We believe this will attach to SUMO a stronger set-theoretical interpretation that will allow
deciding more queries and provide better intuition for avoiding contradictory formalizations.
Once this is done, our plan is to train ENIGMA-style [5–8] query answering and contradiction-
finding [20] AITP systems on such SUMO problems and develop autoformalization [9–11,23,24]
methods targeting common-sense reasoning based on SUMO.
    In earlier work, we described [16] how to translate SUMO to the strictly first order language
of TPTP-FOF [18] and TF0 [15, 22]. SUMO has an extensive type structure and all relations
have type restrictions on their arguments. Translation to TPTP FOF involved implementing
a sorted (typed) logic axiomatically in TPTP by altering all implications in SUMO to contain
type restrictions on any variables that appear.
    We give a grammar for the fragment of the SUMO language in the domain of our translation
of SUMO. There are some aspects of SUMO that do not fall into this grammar – namely formulas
with modal or probabilistic operators. We have ordinary variables (x), row variables (ρ) and
constants (c). We mutually define the sets of terms t, spines s and formulas ψ as follows:

                                       t ::= x|c|x s|c s|(κx.ψ)

                                            s ::= t s| · |ρ
          ψ ::= ⊥|⊤|(¬ψ)|(ψ → ψ)|(ψ ∧ ψ)|(ψ ∨ ψ)|(ψ ↔ ψ)|(∀x.ψ)|(∃x.ψ)|(t = t)|c s
The definition is mutually recursive since the term κx.ψ depends on the formula ψ. Of course,
κ, ∀ and ∃ are binders.
    Properly parsing SUMO terms and formulas requires mechanisms for infering implicit type
guards for variables (interpreted conjunctively for κ and ∃ and via implication for ∀). Free
variables in SUMO assertions are implicitly universally quantified. For simplicity, we assume
all type guards and implicit quantifiers have already been inferred (as in [16]) before beginning
the translation.
    Our translation maps terms t and spines s to sets and formulas ψ to set theoretic proposi-
tions. The particular set theory we use is higher-order Tarski-Grothendieck as described in [4].
For simplicity we assume SUMO variables (both ordinary and row) are also set theoretic vari-
ables ranging over sets. We likewise assume all SUMO constants are also set theoretic constants
(with the exception of instance and subclass, described below). To translate spines, we need
  ∗ Supported by by the Czech project AI&Reasoning CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15_003/ 0000466 and the European

Regional Development Fund.
   1 https://www.ontologyportal.org
                                                                                                     Page 35

Embedding SUMO in Set Theory                                                   Brown, Pease, Urban


a way to form lists as sets. We do this generically by simply assuming a set nil, an operator
cons taking two sets to a set (meant to be the cons pair) and an operator listprod taking a two
sets to a set (where listprod A B is meant to be the set of cons pairs cons a b where a ∈ A
and b ∈ B). We also assume a special set U, which will act as the universe of elements that
may be members of classes. The universe is assumed to be closed under set theoretic function
application and the list operators mentioned above.
     A major commitment of our translation is that, if ti are SUMO terms translated to sets t′i ,
then SUMO formulas of the form instance t1 t2 will translate to t′1 ∈ t′2 and SUMO formulas of
the form subclass t1 t2 will translate to t′1 ⊆ t′2 .
     We isolate a few special cases in SUMO: Class, SetOrClass, Abstract and Entity. These
are considered classes in SUMO, but will be considered superclasses in our translation. In
particular, the interpretation of Class will be the ℘U, power set of U. Hence every member of
the interpretation of Class will be a subset of U. Since SUMO declares SetOrClass, Abstract
and Entity to contain Class, none of these four superclasses can be a member of ℘U. Whenever
SUMO globally declares t1 to be a subclass of t2 , we also declare the corresponding sets t′1 and
t′2 to be members of ℘U, except in the four special superclass cases.
     The translation of spines is the obvious one: we use nil for the empty spine, cons for a term
followed by a spine, and the same variable ρ for row variables. For terms, we translate x and c
directly, since we assumed these are variables and constants in the set theory. We translate x s
and c s by using set theoretic function application (where the translation of the spine s is the
argument). We translate κx.ψ as {x ∈ U|ψ ′ } where ψ ′ is the translation of ψ. Translation of
formulas proceeds in the obvious way, with only the c s case being noteworthy. Note that c s
is both a term and a formula. Interpreting c s as a term gives a set b and we translate c s to
the formula 0 ∈ b. The idea is that b will be either 0 or 1, with 0 ∈ b being false if b is 0 and
true if b is 1.

Future work While we have an incomplete translation of all the elements of SUMO that
are beyond syntactic first order expressions, we now have a basis for mapping SUMO into
set theory. The current translation addresses the κ binder, a term level binder one cannot
represent in standard first-order logic. In addition, we can translate row variables directly as
sets, although we expect more work is needed to create proper bounds for quantifiers of row
variables. In addition a future translation should account for temporal holdsDuring and modal
operators (including modalAttribute, confersRight etc). We expect this to be the next stage
of our efforts.
    An initial use the mapping will be to have a type-checker that gives immediate feedback to
SUMO developers on one aspect of the correctness of their higher-order axioms, in the same
way that the TPTP FOF and TF0 translations provide feedback on the correct use of types in
the FOF portion of SUMO.
    We have some inference tests for SUMO2 for TPTP FOF and TF0. We will expand this
corpus to include tests expressible in the new TH0 translation. This will serve as a regression
suite for SUMO’s higher-order content, as well as a source for testing the performance of HOL
provers, such as Satallax [3], Zipperposition [1] and LEO-III [21].
    It is possible that set theory provides a model for (some part or all of) SUMO after the
translation. Proving that at least portions of SUMO have a model would be a much stronger
statement than current method that only allow us to say that no contradictions have been found
with first order theorem proving within a large set of tests and a generous time bound [17].

    2 https://github.com/ontologyportal/sumo/tree/master/tests/TPTP



2
                                                                                                         Page 36

Embedding SUMO in Set Theory                                                      Brown, Pease, Urban


References
 [1] Alexander Bentkamp, Jasmin Christian Blanchette, Simon Cruanes, and Uwe Waldmann. Super-
     position for lambda-free higher-order logic. Logical Methods in Computer Science, 17(2):1:1–1:38,
     April 2021.
 [2] Christoph Benzmüller and Adam Pease. Higher-Order Aspects and Context in SUMO. In Ivan
     José Varzinczak Jos Lehmann and Alan Bundy, editors, Special issue on Reasoning with context
     in the Semantic Web, volume 12-13. Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web, 2012.
 [3] Chad E. Brown. Satallax: An automatic higher-order prover. In Bernhard Gramlich, Dale Miller,
     and Uli Sattler, editors, IJCAR, volume 7364 of LNCS, pages 111–117. Springer, 2012.
 [4] Chad E. Brown and Karol Pąk. A tale of two set theories. In Cezary Kaliszyk, Edwin C. Brady,
     Andrea Kohlhase, and Claudio Sacerdoti Coen, editors, Intelligent Computer Mathematics - 12th
     International Conference, CICM 2019, Prague, Czech Republic, July 8-12, 2019, Proceedings,
     volume 11617 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 44–60. Springer, 2019.
 [5] Karel Chvalovský, Jan Jakubuv, Martin Suda, and Josef Urban. ENIGMA-NG: efficient neural
     and gradient-boosted inference guidance for E. In Pascal Fontaine, editor, Automated Deduction -
     CADE 27 - 27th International Conference on Automated Deduction, Natal, Brazil, August 27-30,
     2019, Proceedings, volume 11716 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 197–215. Springer,
     2019.
 [6] Jan Jakubuv, Karel Chvalovský, Miroslav Olsák, Bartosz Piotrowski, Martin Suda, and Josef Ur-
     ban. ENIGMA anonymous: Symbol-independent inference guiding machine (system description).
     In Nicolas Peltier and Viorica Sofronie-Stokkermans, editors, Automated Reasoning - 10th Interna-
     tional Joint Conference, IJCAR 2020, Paris, France, July 1-4, 2020, Proceedings, Part II, volume
     12167 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 448–463. Springer, 2020.
 [7] Jan Jakubuv and Josef Urban. ENIGMA: efficient learning-based inference guiding machine. In
     Herman Geuvers, Matthew England, Osman Hasan, Florian Rabe, and Olaf Teschke, editors,
     Intelligent Computer Mathematics - 10th International Conference, CICM 2017, Edinburgh, UK,
     July 17-21, 2017, Proceedings, volume 10383 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 292–302.
     Springer, 2017.
 [8] Jan Jakubuv and Josef Urban. Hammering Mizar by learning clause guidance. In John Harrison,
     John O’Leary, and Andrew Tolmach, editors, 10th International Conference on Interactive Theo-
     rem Proving, ITP 2019, September 9-12, 2019, Portland, OR, USA, volume 141 of LIPIcs, pages
     34:1–34:8. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019.
 [9] Cezary Kaliszyk, Josef Urban, and Jirí Vyskocil. Automating formalization by statistical and
     semantic parsing of mathematics. In ITP, volume 10499 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
     pages 12–27. Springer, 2017.
[10] Cezary Kaliszyk, Josef Urban, and Jiří Vyskočil. Learning to parse on aligned corpora (rough
     diamond). In Christian Urban and Xingyuan Zhang, editors, Interactive Theorem Proving - 6th
     International Conference, ITP 2015, Nanjing, China, August 24-27, 2015, Proceedings, volume
     9236 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 227–233. Springer, 2015.
[11] Cezary Kaliszyk, Josef Urban, Jiří Vyskočil, and Herman Geuvers. Developing corpus-based trans-
     lation methods between informal and formal mathematics: Project description. In Stephen M.
     Watt, James H. Davenport, Alan P. Sexton, Petr Sojka, and Josef Urban, editors, Intelligent Com-
     puter Mathematics - International Conference, CICM 2014, Coimbra, Portugal, July 7-11, 2014.
     Proceedings, volume 8543 of LNCS, pages 435–439. Springer, 2014.
[12] Laura Kovács and Andrei Voronkov. First-order theorem proving and vampire. In Proceedings
     of the 25th International Conference on Computer Aided Verification, volume 8044 of CAV 2013,
     pages 1–35, New York, NY, USA, 2013. Springer-Verlag New York, Inc.
[13] Ian Niles and Adam Pease. Toward a Standard Upper Ontology. In Chris Welty and Barry
     Smith, editors, Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Formal Ontology in Information
     Systems (FOIS-2001), pages 2–9, 2001.

                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                        Page 37

Embedding SUMO in Set Theory                                                     Brown, Pease, Urban


[14] Adam Pease. Ontology: A Practical Guide. Articulate Software Press, Angwin, CA, 2011.
[15] Adam Pease. Arithmetic and inference in a large theory. In AI in Theorem Proving, 2019.
[16] Adam Pease and Stephan Schulz. Knowledge Engineering for Large Ontologies with Sigma KEE
     3.0. In The International Joint Conference on Automated Reasoning, 2014.
[17] Adam Pease and Stephan Schulz. Contradiction detection and repair in a large theory. In The
     International FLAIRS Conference Proceedings, 2022.
[18] Adam Pease, Geoff Sutcliffe, Nick Siegel, and Steven Trac. Large Theory Reasoning with SUMO
     at CASC. AI Communications, Special issue on Practical Aspects of Automated Reasoning, 23(2-
     3):137–144, 2010.
[19] Stephan Schulz. E - A Brainiac Theorem Prover. AI Commun., 15(2-3):111–126, 2002.
[20] Stephan Schulz, Geoff Sutcliffe, Josef Urban, and Adam Pease. Detecting inconsistencies in large
     first-order knowledge bases. In Proceedings of CADE 26, pages 310–325. Springer, 2017.
[21] Alexander Steen and Christoph Benzmüller.           The higher-order prover leo-iii.     CoRR,
     abs/1802.02732, 2018.
[22] Geoff Sutcliffe, Stephan Schulz, Koen Claessen, and Peter Baumgartner. The TPTP Typed First-
     order Form with Arithmetic. In International Conference on Logic for Programming Artificial
     Intelligence and Reasoning (LPAR 2012), pages 406–419, 2012.
[23] Qingxiang Wang, Chad E. Brown, Cezary Kaliszyk, and Josef Urban. Exploration of neural
     machine translation in autoformalization of mathematics in mizar. In CPP, pages 85–98. ACM,
     2020.
[24] Qingxiang Wang, Cezary Kaliszyk, and Josef Urban. First experiments with neural translation of
     informal to formal mathematics. In CICM, volume 11006 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
     pages 255–270. Springer, 2018.




4
                                                                                                       Page 38

Embedding SUMO in Set Theory                                                    Brown, Pease, Urban


1    Appendix
Examples We briefly consider two first-order example queries and three queries involving κ.
Queries differ from assertions in that their free variables are implicitly existentially quantified,
with implicit type guards added conjunctively. We prove the translated query in the Megalodon
interactive prover (the successor to the Egal system [4]).
    Oure first example is given by the SUMO query:
(instance Org1-1 Organization)
(query (member ?MEMBER Org1-1))

This translates into Megalodon as follows:
Variable s_ORG1_x2D1:set.
Hypothesis p5315: (s_ORG1_x2D1 :e s_ORGANIZATION).
Theorem p5316: exists v_MEMBER, v_MEMBER :e s_PHYSICAL
    /\ (bp (s_MEMBER (cons v_MEMBER (cons s_ORG1_x2D1 nil)))).

The (interactively constructed) proof makes use of (translated) SUMO assertions that all col-
lections have a physical object member and that organizations are collections.
    Our second example is given by the SUMO query:
(=>
  (and
    (instance ?A Animal)
    (not
      (exists (?PART)
        (and
          (instance ?PART SpinalColumn)
          (part ?PART ?A)))))
  (not
    (instance ?A Vertebrate)))

(not
  (exists (?SPINE)
    (and
      (instance ?SPINE SpinalColumn)
      (part ?SPINE BananaSlug10-1))))

(instance BananaSlug10-1 Animal)

(and
  (instance BodyPart10-1 BodyPart)
  (component BodyPart10-1 BananaSlug10-1))

(query (instance BananaSlug10-1 Invertebrate))

This translates into the following Megalodon formalization:
Variable s_SPINALCOLUMN:set.
Hypothesis p5320: forall v_A, v_A :e s_ENTITY -> v_A :e s_OBJECT ->
 ((v_A :e s_ANIMAL)
   /\ (~ (exists v_PART, v_PART :e s_ENTITY /\ v_PART :e s_OBJECT
            /\ (v_PART :e s_SPINALCOLUMN) /\ (bp (s_PART (cons v_PART (cons v_A nil))))))

                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                   Page 39

Embedding SUMO in Set Theory                                                 Brown, Pease, Urban


   -> (~ (v_A :e s_VERTEBRATE))).
Variable s_BANANASLUG10_x2D1:set.
Hypothesis p5321: (~ (exists v_SPINE, v_SPINE :e s_ENTITY /\ v_SPINE :e s_OBJECT
     /\ (v_SPINE :e s_SPINALCOLUMN) /\ (bp (s_PART (cons v_SPINE (cons s_BANANASLUG10_x2D1 nil)))))).
Hypothesis p5322: (s_BANANASLUG10_x2D1 :e s_ANIMAL).
Variable s_BODYPART10_x2D1:set.
Hypothesis p5323: (s_BODYPART10_x2D1 :e s_BODYPART)
  /\ (bp (s_COMPONENT (cons s_BODYPART10_x2D1 (cons s_BANANASLUG10_x2D1 nil)))).
Theorem p5324: (s_BANANASLUG10_x2D1 :e s_INVERTEBRATE).
The proof uses the translation of the SUMO assertion that the classes of vertebrates and
invertebrates form a partition of the class of animals.
   Our κ examples are all variants of the same idea, and all are easily provable. The first κ
example query is given in SUMO as follows:
(query (forall (?V) (=> (instance ?V Atom)
        (forall (?E) (=> (instance ?E Electron)
  (=> (part ?E ?V)
      (instance ?E (KappaFn ?x (and (part ?x ?V) (instance ?x Electron))))))))))
This translates to the following Megalodon formalization:
Theorem p5326: (forall v_V, v_V :e s_ENTITY -> v_V :e s_OBJECT -> ((v_V :e s_ATOM)
 -> (forall v_E, v_E :e s_ENTITY -> v_E :e s_OBJECT -> ((v_E :e s_ELECTRON)
 -> ((bp (s_PART (cons v_E (cons v_V nil))))
 -> (v_E :e {v_X :e Univ1 | v_X :e s_OBJECT /\ v_X :e s_ENTITY
      /\ (bp (s_PART (cons v_X (cons v_V nil)))) /\ (v_X :e s_ELECTRON)})))))).
The second κ example query is given in SUMO as follows:
(query (forall (?V) (=> (instance ?V Atom)
        (forall (?E) (=> (instance ?E Electron)
  (=> (instance ?E (KappaFn ?x (and (part ?x ?V) (instance ?x Electron))))
      (part ?E ?V)))))))
This translates to the following Megalodon formalization:
Theorem p5327: (forall v_V, v_V :e s_ENTITY -> v_V :e s_OBJECT -> ((v_V :e s_ATOM) ->
 (forall v_E, v_E :e s_ENTITY -> v_E :e s_OBJECT -> ((v_E :e s_ELECTRON)
 -> ((v_E :e {v_X :e Univ1 | v_X :e s_OBJECT /\ v_X :e s_ENTITY
         /\ (bp (s_PART (cons v_X (cons v_V nil)))) /\ (v_X :e s_ELECTRON)})
 -> (bp (s_PART (cons v_E (cons v_V nil))))))))).
The final κ example does not use κ in the statement, though κ is vital to proving the translated
theorem. In SUMO the example is given as follows:
(query (forall (?V) (=> (instance ?V Atom)
        (forall (?E) (=> (instance ?E Electron)
  (exists (?C)
    (and (instance ?C Class)
      (<=> (part ?E ?V)
           (instance ?E ?C)))))))))
This translates to the following Megalodon formalization:
Theorem p5328: (forall v_V, v_V :e s_ENTITY -> v_V :e s_OBJECT -> ((v_V :e s_ATOM) ->
 (forall v_E, v_E :e s_ENTITY -> v_E :e s_OBJECT -> ((v_E :e s_ELECTRON)
 -> (exists v_C, v_C :e s_ENTITY /\ v_C :e s_CLASS /\ (v_C :e s_CLASS)
      /\ ((bp (s_PART (cons v_E (cons v_V nil)))) <-> (v_E :e v_C))))))).

6
                                                                                                      Page 40

Embedding SUMO in Set Theory                                                    Brown, Pease, Urban


Converting SUMO to First Order All the strictly higher-order content in SUMO was
previously lost in translation to first-order, whether TPTP or TF0. The translation steps
include:

   • expanding ”row variables” which allow for stating axioms without commitment to the
     number of arguments a relation has, similar to Lisp’s @REST construct

   • instantiating ”predicate variables” with all possible values. This is needed for any axiom
     that has a variable in place of a relation.

   • expanding the arity of all variable arity relations as set of relations with different names
     depending upon their fixed number of arguments

   • renaming any relations given as arguments to other relations

   SUMO has no native implementation in a theorem prover, and has no formal semantics
beyond that of standard first order logic, so the process of translating SUMO into a language
with a fully specified semantics, such as TPTP_FOF, TF0 or THF gives SUMO its semantics.

Type Mechanisms All relations (including functions) in SUMO have a type signature. As
a consequence, we don’t need an explicit syntax for types/sorts of variables, and can deduce
them automatically. We can have classes as well as instances as arguments. The domain and
range relations are meta-predicates that direct the Sigma translators to state that arguments
to a given relation (or the return type of a function, respectively) are instances of a given type.
The domainSubclass, and rangeSubclass relations state that arguments to a given relation
(or the return type of a function, respectively) are a given class or one of its subclasses. For
example

(domain DensityFn 1 MassMeasure)
(domain DensityFn 2 VolumeMeasure)
(instance DensityFn BinaryFunction)
(range DensityFn FunctionQuantity)

   DensityFn is a BinaryFunction that takes an instance of a MassMeasure and a VolumeMeasure,
respectively, as its first and second arguments. In

(domainSubclass typicalPart 1 Object)
(domainSubclass typicalPart 2 Object)
(instance typicalPart BinaryPredicate)

    the first and second arguments to the typicalPart relation are of the class Object or one
of its subclasses.

THF Translator Below by SUMO objects (SOs) we mean arbitrary SUMO classes and in-
stances.
    Our translator maps all SUMO objects to sets in HO TG set theory. The subclass relation
is translated as inclusion and the instance relation as membership. SOs that are potentially
large such as abstract, mathematical and related SOs thus become sets that may live in higher
TG universes.
    SOs can be applied to other SOs and variables, creating terms and formulas. Such SOs will
be sets that encode relations and functions. Their application to other SOs is the corresponding

                                                                                                 7
                                                                                                      Page 41

Embedding SUMO in Set Theory                                                    Brown, Pease, Urban


application of the set theoretical functional and relational sets to other sets. To handle variable
arities and row variables, arguments are always appended together into lists.
    SUMO quantifiers and logical connectives are mapped directly to their FOL counterparts.
Applications that are at predicate positions in formulas are casted by a special bp predicate
into propositions.
    To illustrate a significant higher order construct in SUMO, consider the following problem
that uses an axiom with KappaFn, which defines a class on the fly, without the need to reify it.

(<=>
    (totalFacilityTypeInArea ?AREA ?TYPE ?COUNT)
    (cardinality
        (KappaFn ?ITEM
            (and
                (instance ?ITEM ?TYPE)
                (located ?ITEM ?AREA))) ?COUNT))

(instance DejvickaStation TrainStation)
(located DejvickaStation PragueCzechRepublic)
(instance HradCanskaStation TrainStation)
(located HradCanskaStation PragueCzechRepublic)

Q: (totalFacilityTypeInArea ?AREA ?TYPE ?COUNT)
A: [?AREA=PragueCzechRepublic,?TYPE=TrainStation,?COUNT=2]

    The first axiom states that for the ternary relation of totalFacilityTypeInArea, which
related an area, a class of Object and a count of those objects within that area, it is equivalent
to the cardinality of the instances of the class that are defined to be instances of the same type,
and present within a particular ?AREA.
    We should be able to ask what relations are deducable for totalFacilityTypeInArea and
get the answer that, for this knowledge base, there are two instances of TrainStation that are
known to be in the CzechRepublic.

(SLEEPING c= PSYCHOLOGICALPROCESS).
(ASLEEP :e CONSCIOUSNESSATTRIBUTE).
((bp (ATTRIBUTE (cons v_AGENT (cons ASLEEP nil))))
\/ (bp (ATTRIBUTE (cons v_AGENT (cons AWAKE nil))))
-> (bp (ATTRIBUTE (cons v_AGENT (cons LIVING nil))))).

    are the translations of:

(subclass Sleeping PsychologicalProcess)
(instance Asleep ConsciousnessAttribute)
(=>
    (or
        (attribute ?AGENT Asleep)
        (attribute ?AGENT Awake))
    (attribute ?AGENT Living))




8
                                                                                                                          Page 42




                             Analyzing Proof Components∗
                                 Karel Chvalovský and Josef Urban
                           Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech republic,
                            karel@chvalovsky.cz and josef.urban@gmail.com

     Modern automated theorem provers (ATPs) for first-order logic, such as E [6] or Vampire [5],
usually start a proof search by trying to classify the input problem so that they can use strategies
that fit the problem best. However, not only are there different problems, each problem also
commonly consists of various (semi)independent parts that should be treated differently. The
provers are able to treat the most common special cases, like equalities or arithmetic, specifically,
but no general approach exists. Although a guidance based on various machine learning models
provides a partial solution to these problems, because such models can, in principle, dynamically
adapt their guidance as the proof search evolves, it has only been of limited success so far.
Therefore, it seems natural to study these issues directly to better understand them.
     In [2], we made some initial steps in this direction; we try to detect components in unsuccess-
ful proof attempts, run these components individually, and then use the best obtained clauses
from these individual runs to complete the proof. This approach seems promising, but it is hard
to analyze what is actually happening inside. A key issue being that detecting components in
our setting is an unsupervised task with no ground truth available. For that reason, we decided
to create a dataset that allows us to better analyze this behavior with the available training
and testing examples.
     Although there are various mathematically well-defined ways to combine two (or more) com-
ponents into one problem, we take advantage of already available mathematical formal libraries
and created a natural dataset with possibly many types of components. We take the Mizar
Mathematical Library, which can be exported to first-order logic, and hence have a long list
of problems (theorems or lemmata) with their dependencies. Many of these problems can be
proved by ATPs (various versions of E, ENIGMA, Vampire,. . . ) using a reasonable premise
selection. Moreover, these proofs can be analyzed, and we obtain for each problem a minimized
set (or more sets) of dependencies required for the proof. For example, we have a theorem T (ex-
ported from Mizar) that is automatically provable from the lemmata L1 , . . . , Ln (also exported
from Mizar) by an ATP. Assume that L1 and L2 are two lemmata from different mathematical li-
braries. Furthermore, L1 is provable from L11 , . . . , Lm                                       1
                                                             1 and L2 is provable from L2 , . . . , L2 , where
                                                                                                              k
  1           m      1            k
L1 , . . . , L1 and L2 , . . . , L2 have no overlap or insignificant overlap. Then we can expand L1 and
L2 in T , so a new expanded problem is to prove T from L11 , . . . , Lm         1            k
                                                                           1 , L2 , . . . , L2 , L3 , . . . , Ln . This
new problem has well-defined components (the expansions of L1 and L2 ) as we wanted. In fact,
we can produce many such datasets depending on requirements like number of components,
overlap of components, size of expansions, . . .
     It is possible to understand exported Mizar problems as a large graph in which the nodes
are first-order formulae and the edges show dependencies; an edge from L to T means that L
was used in a proof of T . In fact, we usually have more types of edges because we have more
minimized solutions to a problem. With such a graph, we can easily produce the expansions
described previously. In our particular case, we obtain a graph with 67795 nodes, where 29687
nodes are leaves (having no dependencies) and 19334 nodes are roots (not used in other proofs).
Although the number of roots may seem a bit high, it is because we are only interested in

   ∗ Supported by the Czech project AI&Reasoning CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15 003/0000466 and the European Re-

gional Development Fund.
                                                                                                                       Page 43

Analyzing Proof Components                                                                  Chvalovský and Urban



       Lemma 1                                                                                              Lemma 1
       Lemma 2                                                                                              Lemma 2
       Mixed                                                                                                Mixed
       Other                                                                                                Other
       False                                                                                                False




               (a) A common situation.                                    (b) A good situation.

Figure 1: Processed clauses (nodes) and their derivations (arrows) in two successful runs are
shown. Red (green) nodes correspond to clauses obtained from expanded Lemma 1 (2) including
derived clauses that use only expanded Lemma 1 (2) as their dependencies. Brown clauses
depend only on clauses different from Lemma 1 and 2 expansions in their derivations. Orange
clauses depend on a mixture of previous types of clauses. An arrow from c1 to c2 means that
c1 was used in the derivation of c2 . The final contradiction is the gray node.


problems that can be proved by ATPs, and hence many real dependencies may be lost. An
advantage of such a graph is that train/test splits are easy to define. One way is that we, for
example, randomly split root nodes into two parts—train and test roots. All nodes having a
path to a train root (or are train roots themselves) are now called train nodes. On the other
hand, remaining nodes, which have no path to a train node (and hence they are test roots
or have a path to a test root), are test nodes. Clearly, there are more train nodes than test
nodes. We obtain a fair split of train and test datasets by expanding only train and test nodes,
respectively. In our example, we may obtain 275K possible expansions for the train dataset
and 5K possible expansions for the test dataset; however, they correspond to approximately
3K unique problems on the train dataset and roughly 100 unique problems on the test dataset,
because there are many possible ways to expand a problem.
    Having such a dataset enables further analysis of algorithms used to obtain components in [2]
and compare them with intended components (our expansions). A clause selection guidance
based on GNNs1 , see [4], allows one to extract representations of individual clauses in a latent
space and then identify components there, moreover, we can visualize them and also display
intended components, see Figure 1. In Figure 1a we see a common situation where it is hard to
distinguish both expansions. Sometimes, like in 1b, they are reasonably separated. However,
the former situation is much more common than the latter. This improves when we retrain our
algorithms using the new dataset, however, preliminary results show that further analysis of
our pipeline is still necessary.
    Clearly, our dataset is useful for many other experiments, including conjecturing (recon-
structing L1 and L2 ), and we will present some preliminary results in this direction.
    1 Note that GNNs are useful for similar problems that involve components, as was recently observed [7]

that GNNs align with dynamic programming. Instead of learning algorithms, for example, in combinatorial
optimization, from scratch, it is beneficial to learn their individual subroutines (modules) separately, cf. [1, 3].


2
                                                                                                          Page 44

Analyzing Proof Components                                                       Chvalovský and Urban


References
[1] Quentin Cappart, Didier Chételat, Elias B. Khalil, Andrea Lodi, Christopher Morris, and Petar
    Veličković. Combinatorial optimization and reasoning with graph neural networks. In Zhi-Hua
    Zhou, editor, IJCAI-21, pages 4348–4355. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence
    Organization, 8 2021. Survey Track.
[2] Karel Chvalovský, Jan Jakubův, Miroslav Olšák, and Josef Urban. Learning theorem proving
    components. In Anupam Das and Sara Negri, editors, TABLEAUX 2021, pages 266–278, Cham,
    2021. Springer International Publishing.
[3] Andrew Dudzik and Petar Velickovic. Graph neural networks are dynamic programmers. CoRR,
    abs/2203.15544, 2022.
[4] Jan Jakubův, Karel Chvalovský, Miroslav Olsák, Bartosz Piotrowski, Martin Suda, and Josef Ur-
    ban. ENIGMA anonymous: Symbol-independent inference guiding machine (system description).
    In Nicolas Peltier and Viorica Sofronie-Stokkermans, editors, Automated Reasoning - 10th Interna-
    tional Joint Conference, IJCAR 2020, Paris, France, July 1-4, 2020, Proceedings, Part II, volume
    12167 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 448–463. Springer, 2020.
[5] Laura Kovács and Andrei Voronkov. First-order theorem proving and Vampire. In Natasha Shary-
    gina and Helmut Veith, editors, CAV, volume 8044 of LNCS, pages 1–35. Springer, 2013.
[6] Stephan Schulz. System description: E 1.8. In Kenneth L. McMillan, Aart Middeldorp, and Andrei
    Voronkov, editors, LPAR, volume 8312 of LNCS, pages 735–743. Springer, 2013.
[7] Keyulu Xu, Jingling Li, Mozhi Zhang, Simon S. Du, K. Kawarabayashi, and Stefanie Jegelka. What
    can neural networks reason about? In ICLR, 2020.




                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                       Page 45




                                   Scaling Naproche
                            Adrian De Lon and Peter Koepke
             University of Bonn, Germany, https://www.math.uni-bonn.de/ag/logik/

     The Naproche [1] (Natural proof checking) theorem prover demonstrates that it is possible
to write non-trivial fully natural machine-verified proofs in a controlled natural language for
mathematics: every statement is a statement of the common language of mathematics, and the
argument uses familiar declarative proof structures. Naproche formalizations can be written
in a LATEX format which allows immediate mathematical typesetting. The system is available
within the Isabelle prover platform [3], including some example formalizations which partly
resemble undergraduate mathematical material.
     Natural mathematical texts assume that the reader could in principle fill in lots of technical
detail and implicit proof steps. Likewise Naproche’s aspiration to process similar texts requires
a high degree of “machine intelligence” which is achieved through careful organization of proof
tasks which are given to strong automated provers. Modeling the softly typed natural language
is carried out with first-order defined types so that subtypes and partial functions with guards
on definedness are available. Unfortunately type-checking of complex terms presently spawns a
number of general first-order proof tasks which in general can only be discharged at run-time,
i.e., during the proof process. “Human-sized” proof steps also stretch the abilities of ATPs.
At the moment basically all previous statements are made into premisses of proof tasks. Often
reformulations of proofs are necessary to help the ATP whilst keeping the naturalness and
readability of a text.
     As improvements to the Naproche system are allowing longer and interlinked formalizations,
the above-mentioned difficulties are mounting up. Naproche’s predecessor SAD was only able to
process and check mathematical “miniatures” which each came along with purpose-built onto-
logical preliminaries. Small text sizes resulted in small proof tasks which did not overwhelm the
ATPs. With the incorporation of SAD into Naproche we have gone from miniatures to chapter
sized texts and recently to small libraries to be re-used in other formalizations. Obviously this
led to a steep increase in the number of possible premisses which resulted in several types of
prover problems:
     Check times. Many Naproche formalizations require several minutes checking time on
standard laptops but some texts need even some hours. Usually more time is spent on type
checking (which is called ontological checking) than on the logical checking of proof steps. These
problems got worse after replacing a crude and potentially contradictory underlying set theory
by a Kelley–Morse-style ontology which distinguishes between sets and classes. This, however,
leads to many additional proof in ontological checking: when unions A ∪ B have been originally
defined for classes, then the union a ∪ b of two sets requires proofs that a and b are also classes.
     Erratic prover behaviour. Extensive texts usually contain many function symbols which an
ATP can use for unification-based proof searches. Automatic proof steps can be confused by
adding symbols which in principle are not connected with the actual prover task.
     Ontological checking. Although type-checking should normally be a mild proving task, the
use of general purpose ATPs in a large number of checks increases the probability that an ATP
will get on a wrong track and miss obvious arguments. Sometimes we could only get ontological
correctness by putting some type information into a statement immediately before the statement
with the problematic term - something one would hardly find in natural mathematical texts.
     Stability of formalizations. We use E [7, 8] as the main external prover. Many Naproche
formalizations are written against a specific version of E, with proof steps chosen accordingly.
                                                                                                            Page 46



Scaling Naproche                                                                         De Lon, Koepke


Replacing that version of E with a different version (or a different ATP entirely) typically results
in some proof tasks failing, even when the different version performs better overall. This results
in a significant maintenance burden, particularly for larger formalizations.
    In our talk we shall report on ongoing work aiming to avoid or mitigate these scaling issues.

    1. Tracing prover behaviour: when do provers latch on to obviously hopeless search path?
       What can we learn from concrete examples?

    2. Experimenting with multiple ATPs: where lie the relative strengths of individual ATPs
       in the context of Naproche? For example we have seen proof tasks where the addition
       of a single irrelevant hypothesis makes the task impossible for some provers, while others
       can solve the problem within roughly one second. So far we have used E, iProver [4, 2],
       SPASS [9, 11], and Vampire [10, 5] for our experiments.

    3. Adding premise selection (e.g. starting with a MePo-like [6] filter) to Naproche.

    4. Simplifying or reducing ontological checking. Most ontological checks should not amount
       to full first-order proof tasks.

    5. Experiments with different ontologies (Kelley–Morse vs. Zermelo–Fraenkel) show that
       there are trade-offs between richer ontologies (adding classes and/or urelements) on the
       one hand and burdening users with proof obligations as well as cluttering exported proof
       tasks with type guards on the other.

    6. Reducing checking times through improvements to the architecture of Naproche: increas-
       ing parallelism, caching, and more.

    We shall also talk more generally about the potential of the Naproche approach with respect
to article-sized and textbook-sized formalizations.


References
 [1] De Lon, A., Koepke, P., Lorenzen, A., Marti, A., Schütz, M., Wenzel, M.: The Isabelle/Naproche
     natural language proof assistant. In: Platzer, A., Sutcliffe, G. (eds.) Automated Deduction –
     CADE 28. pp. 614–624. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2021)
 [2] Duarte, A., Korovin, K.: Implementing superposition in iProver (system description). In: Peltier,
     N., Sofronie-Stokkermans, V. (eds.) Automated Reasoning - 10th International Joint Conference,
     IJCAR 2020, Paris, France, July 1-4, 2020, Proceedings, Part II. Lecture Notes in Computer
     Science, vol. 12167, pp. 388–397. Springer (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-51054-1 24,
     https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-51054-1_24
 [3] Isabelle contributors: The Isabelle2021 release (February 2021), https://isabelle.in.tum.de
 [4] Korovin, K.: iProver – a theorem prover for first-order logic with support for arithmetic reasoning,
     http://www.cs.man.ac.uk/~korovink/iprover/
 [5] Kovács, L., Voronkov, A.: First-order theorem proving and Vampire. In: CAV 2013. pp. 1–35
     (2013)
 [6] Meng, J., Paulson, L.C.: Lightweight relevance filtering for machine-generated resolution problems.
     J. Appl. Log. 7, 41–57 (2009)
 [7] Schulz, S.: The E theorem prover, https://eprover.org
 [8] Schulz, S., Cruanes, S., Vukmirović, P.: Faster, higher, stronger: E 2.3. In: Fontaine, P. (ed.)
     Proc. of the 27th CADE, Natal, Brasil. pp. 495–507. No. 11716 in LNAI, Springer (2019)

2
                                                                                                      Page 47



Scaling Naproche                                                                    De Lon, Koepke


 [9] SPASS contributors:         SPASS workbench, https://www.mpi-inf.mpg.de/departments/
     automation-of-logic/software/spass-workbench
[10] Voronkov, A., Kovács, L., Reger, G., Suda, M., Rawson, M., Bhayat, A., Schoisswohl, J., Rath,
     J., Hozzova, P.: The Vampire prover, https://vprover.github.io/
[11] Weidenbach, C., Dimova, D., Fietzke, A., Kumar, R., Suda, M., Wischnewski, P.: SPASS version
     3.5. In: Schmidt, R.A. (ed.) Automated Deduction – CADE-22. pp. 140–145 (2009)




                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                       Page 48




                   Towards neuro-symbolic conjecturing
        Sólrún Halla Einarsdóttir, Moa Johansson, and Nicholas Smallbone
                      Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden.
                          {slrn, moa.johansson, nicsma}@chalmers.se

                                               Abstract
         Theory exploration systems automatically generate mathematical conjectures, by ex-
      ploring a set of terms of interest. This search is expensive for large theories, as the set of
      terms becomes large. We describe ongoing work in combining data-driven and symbolic
      methods for automated conjecturing, where the data-driven part should identify which
      kinds of conjectures are likely to be useful and restrict the symbolic search to those ones.
      As a first step, we have extracted a dataset of lemma templates from Isabelle’s Archive of
      Formal Proofs1 .


1     Introduction
Theory exploration is a symbolic technique for automated conjecturing based on testing [7].
It has been used to successfully discover, for example, lemmas needed in automated (co)-
inductive provers [5, 1]. Our theory exploration system QuickSpec [7], takes as input a number
of functions and datatypes, and builds terms of increasing size. The search space is managed
by using already discovered properties to avoid larger terms that could be reduced or subsumed
by something already known. While this works well for smaller signatures (up to around 10–20
functions) and terms up to about 10 symbols, it eventually runs into exponential blow up.
To address this, we developed a variant of QuickSpec called RoughSpec [2], which restricts
the search space to properties of specific shapes using templates. For example, the template
?F (?F (X, Y ), Z) = ?F (X, ?F (Y, Z)) describes an associative binary function ?F . Currently,
the human user decides which templates to use.
    We plan to instead select templates automatically using a data-driven approach. As a first
step towards this goal, we have collected and started to analyze a large dataset of lemmas from
Isabelle’s Archive of Formal Proofs. The long term aim is to build a neuro-symbolic system
for conjecturing, where given a theory, a machine learning system selects the most promising
templates, and a symbolic system fills in the templates to produce conjectures, discarding
any conjecture which is trivial, trivially false, or already known. Our hypothesis is that this
approach combines the best of the machine learning and symbolic approaches: machine learning
to learn which parts of the search space to focus on, and symbolic methods to reason about
and evaluate specific conjectures.


2     A Library of Lemma Templates
In our previous work [2], our theory exploration system RoughSpec required the user to provide
templates for the properties they were looking for. We also provided a small collection of ”de-
fault” templates describing some properties we guessed might be useful for theory exploration
based on our intuitions and experience. This collection included templates for properties such
as commutativity and distributivity. In order to gain a more robust empirical understanding of

    1 https://www.isa-afp.org/index.html
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Page 49

                          Towards neuro-symbolic conjecturing                                                                                                                Einarsdóttir, Johansson and Smallbone


                          what kinds of templates are useful and to provide a dataset for data-driven experiments we have
                          mined equational lemma templates from the Archive of Formal Proofs(AFP). The AFP con-
                          tains 676 entries from 425 authors, containing almost 200,000 lemmas and more than 3 million
                          lines of code. The entries consist of proof formalizations from a variety of areas of Computer
                          Science, Logic and Mathematics and we believe they are a good source of interesting and useful
                          lemmas, as the lemmas we find there are handwritten as part of proofs that Isabelle users have
                          seen a reason to formalize.


                          2.1                      Preliminary results
                          We have collected and performed preliminary analysis on a dataset containing 22,767 equational
                          lemmas, extracted from 2169 different theory files from 611 AFP entries. For each extracted
                          lemma we generated a template representation of the lemma statement, showing the statement’s
                          term structure with function and variable names abstracted away but using integer labels to
                          keep track of function symbols and variables that occur more than once. The dataset along with
                          the code used to generate it is available at: https://github.com/solrun/LibraryOfLemmas.
                              These 22,767 lemmas are captured by 6567 different templates. In Figure 1 we can see that
                          a small number of templates occur very frequently while the majority occur very seldom with
                          4099 templates occurring only once. The 10 most frequent templates together describe 3057
                          lemmas or 13.5% of the lemmas in our set, while more than 50% of the lemmas can be described
                          using only 266 of the 6567 templates. This supports our hypothesis that only a smaller number
                          of templates is needed to discover many lemmas using template-based conjecturing.
                                             Template frequency                       Cumulative frequency of templates




                                                                                                   Cumulative percentage of lemmas described by templates
                                         600                                                                                                                100




Number of lemmas described by template
                                         500                                                                                                                80

                                         400
                                                                                                                                                            60
                                         300
                                                                                                                                                            40
                                         200

                                         100                                                                                                                20

                                          0                                                                                                                  0
                                               0     1000   2000 3000 4000 5000             6000                                                                  0   1000     2000 3000 4000 5000             6000
                                                            Templates sorted by frequency                                                                                      Templates sorted by frequency
                          Figure 1: Left: Number of lemmas per template, sorted by frequency. Right: Cumulative
                          percentage of lemmas in the dataset covered by most frequent templates.

                              Table 1 shows the top 10 most frequently occurring templates in our dataset, where #
                          lemmas represents the number of lemmas matching the template, # thys is the number of
                          different theory files it occurs in and # sessions is the number of different AFP sessions it
                          occurs in. Template holes are represented by a question mark followed by a capitalized name,
                          while variables are represented by a capitalized name. Among these common templates, we see
                          a lot of similarity: many of the templates in Table 1 resemble each other, differing only in the
                          number of variables or the order of application. Our hypothesis is that we can define a smaller set
                          of “supertemplates” describing families of similar templates that can be generalized to describe
                          the different family members, where using those templates and their generalizations we can

                          2
                                                                                                       Page 50

Towards neuro-symbolic conjecturing                           Einarsdóttir, Johansson and Smallbone


            Template                                    # lemmas      # thys     # sessions
       1    ?F (?G X Y) = ?H (?F X) (?F Y)                 611         261          172
       2    ?F X = ?G (?H X)                               566         265          169
       3    X = ?F (?G X)                                  340         191          139
       4    ?F X = ?F (?G X)                               280         149          118
       5    X = ?F ?G X                                    247         136           98
       6    ?F (?G X Y) Z = ?H (?F X Z) (?F Y Z)           233          90           70
       7    X = ?F X ?G                                    210         132          103
       8    ?F X (?G Y Z) = ?H (?F X Y) (?F X Z)           194          90           74
       9    ?F = ?G (?H X)                                 192          65           56
       10   ?F = ?G ?H X                                   184         110           85

              Table 1: Top 10 most frequently occurring templates in the dataset.


generate a large proportion of the lemmas we need. For example (1) (6) and (8), (3) (5) and
(7), and (9) and (10) should be grouped together and described by common “supertemplates”.
This would further reduce the space of templates to be searched over by RoughSpec.
    In our previous work [2], we defined a set of 10 default templates capturing very common
properties which we found useful in our case studies. Comparing these to the most frequent
templates as shown above, we see that 4 out of our 10 default templates are also in the 10 most
frequently occurring templates in our dataset. Of the remaining six default templates one did
not show up at all, and the other occur in places 20–388. The second most commonly occurring
template in the dataset, ?F X = ?G (?H X), is in a style we had previously disregarded as
being too general to be suited to template-based theory exploration, but seeing how common
this exact form of equivalence template seems to be we will definitely try out using it in future
experiments. The differences between our collection of default templates and the most common
templates in the dataset show the value of collecting a dataset for empirical evaluation.

Extending the dataset. We are currently expanding this dataset to also contain non-
equational lemmas, such as conditionals, inequalities, and predicates. We also plan to extend
the template language to cover e.g. lambda abstractions and quantifiers. With these exten-
sions we should be able to cover all the lemmas in the AFP. Adding more data concerning
for example the topic of the theory where the lemma in question is defined and used or the
function definitions involved may also prove necessary in order to use this dataset to learn what
templates are useful in various theorem proving contexts.


3     Future steps and related work
Having compiled a library of lemma templates, our next steps will be to analyze the data
available there and apply it in the context of theory exploration and theorem proving. Our aim
is to develop machine-learning based methods to make helpful template suggestions for a given
set of functions. We envisage this implemented as a machine learning model trained to predict
likely useful templates, given a suitable representation of a theory (i.e. a set of definitions
of datatypes, functions and perhaps already known properties). These templates are then
passed to a symbolic theory exploration systems (RoughSpec), which instantiates, tests and
possibly proves properties before presented to the user. This has some similarities to neuro-
symbolic program synthesis systems like DreamCoder [3], which use a neural network to predict

                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                          Page 51

Towards neuro-symbolic conjecturing                              Einarsdóttir, Johansson and Smallbone


a symbolic program, given a set of input-output examples. We could also use clustering methods
to group together templates that are often seen together in the same theory formalization and
then suggest templates based on lemmas that have already been defined by the user or found
by exploration.
    There have been recent attempts to use large language models for conjecturing tasks [8, 6].
A problem here is that the output typically contains a mixture of interesting theorems, non-
theorems that “look like” theorems as well as many copies and alpha-renamings of lemmas
occurring in the training data. Symbolic theory exploration methods are usually better at
targeting more specifically novel conjectures, but struggle with large scale theories instead.
    We believe that the most promising way forward is a combination of neural and symbolic
methods, where the neural part makes suggestions of potential analogies to similar theories seen
before, while they symbolic part fills in the details in such a way that redundant conjectures
are avoided. Heras et al. demonstrated a prototype system similar to what we propose, for
suggesting lemmas by analogy via templates [4]. Here, the user is supposed to be wanting to
prove a particular conjecture, and asks the system for analogous prior theorems. If such a
similar theorem exists (determined by data-driven methods), and its proof uses a lemma, then
the lemma was generalized into a template. This template was then instantiated using symbols
relevant to the new proof attempt at hand. Our proposed system differs in that we do not want
to rely on a particular proof attempt, but rather suggest interesting conjectures based on the
functions and datatypes in scope, and how they are defined.


References
[1] S. H. Einarsdóttir, M. Johansson, and J. Å. Pohjola. Into the infinite - theory exploration for
    coinduction. In Proceedings of AISC 2018, pages 70–86, 01 2018.
[2] S. H. Einarsdóttir, N. Smallbone, and M. Johansson. Template-based theory exploration: Discover-
    ing properties of functional programs by testing. In IFL 2020: Proceedings of the 32nd Symposium
    on Implementation and Application of Functional Languages, IFL 2020, page 67–78, New York,
    NY, USA, 2020. Association for Computing Machinery.
[3] K. Ellis, C. Wong, M. Nye, M. Sablé-Meyer, L. Morales, L. Hewitt, L. Cary, A. Solar-Lezama, and
    J. B. Tenenbaum. DreamCoder: Bootstrapping inductive program synthesis with wake-sleep library
    learning. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Programming
    Language Design and Implementation, page 835–850, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for
    Computing Machinery.
[4] J. Heras, E. Komendantskaya, M. Johansson, and E. Maclean. Proof-pattern recognition and lemma
    discovery in ACL2. In Proceedings of LPAR, 2013.
[5] M. Johansson, D. Rosén, N. Smallbone, and K. Claessen. Hipster: Integrating theory exploration
    in a proof assistant. In Proceedings of CICM, pages 108–122. Springer, 2014.
[6] M. N. Rabe, D. Lee, K. Bansal, and C. Szegedy. Mathematical reasoning via self-supervised skip-
    tree training. In Proceedings of ICLR, 2021.
[7] N. Smallbone, M. Johansson, K. Claessen, and M. Algehed. Quick specifications for the busy
    programmer. Journal of Functional Programming, 27, 2017.
[8] J. Urban and J. Jakubův. First neural conjecturing datasets and experiments. In Proceedings of
    CICM, 2020.




4
                                                                                                          Page 52




              Program Synthesis from Integer Sequences:
                Initial Self-Learning Run on the OEIS ∗
                                          Thibault Gauthier
                     Czech Technical University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic
                                     email@thibaultgauthier.fr


                                                 Abstract
           Through self-learning, our system discovers in three weeks programs that generate the
       first 16 numbers of more than 50000 OEIS sequences


1      Introduction
In this work, we propose to rely on a “self-learning” system (a system that learns from its own
searches) to create programs generating sequences from the On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer
Sequences (OEIS) [6] and beyond. Program synthesis for different domains (e.g. operations
on lists) has been attempted by inductive logic programming systems (such as Popper [5]) and
reinforcement learning systems (such as DeepCoder [1]). Within the theorem proving commu-
nity, the development of methods for term synthesis has been explored in inductive theorem
proving [4] and in counterexample generators [2, 3].
    Here is how our self-learning approach creates programs for OEIS sequences. Its self-learning
loop consists of two alternating phases: a search phase and a learning phase. Initially, our search
discovers some solutions by randomly building programs and checking if they generate OEIS
sequences. From those solutions, a tree neural network is trained to predict what the right
building action is, given a target sequence and a partially built program. The next search is
then guided by the statistical correlations learned by the network, usually producing even more
solutions. One iteration of the self-learning loop is called a generation. Note, as it is usual
for reinforcement learning systems, that our approach is completely unsupervised. That is to
say, the system is never told the corresponding program for a particular sequence but has to
discover it through guided search.


2      Programming Language
Our language contains the tokens 0, 1, 2, +, −, x, i, ×, div , mod , cond , λ, loop, compr which follow
the semantics of Standard ML except for cond , loop, compr defined by:

          cond (a, b, c) := if a ≤ 0 then b else c
           loop(f, a, b) := b                                                        if a ≤ 0
                            f (loop(f, a − 1, b), a)                                otherwise
           compr (f, a) := failure                                                   if a < 0
                            min{y | y ≥ 0 ∧ f (y, 0) ≤ 0}                            if a = 0
                            min{y | y > compr (f, a − 1) ∧ f (y, 0) ≤ 0}            otherwise
    ∗ This work was supported by the Czech Science Foundation project 20-06390Y.
                                                                                                                  Page 53

Synthesis of Programs                                                                               T. Gauthier


    1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
    0
     16    17    18     19   20   21      22   23    24    25     26    27    28     29    30    31        32

Figure 1: Percentage of sequences n-covered among 16-covered sequences with at least 32
elements



                             Table 1: Solutions for famous OEIS sequences

          Sequence                         Program
          Catalan numbers                  loop(f,x,1)
                                           where f (x0 , i0 ) = ((i0 × 2 − 1) × x0 × 2) div (i0 + 1)
                                                                   0
          Pseudo-prime numbers             compr ({x0 ≥ 0 | (2x +2 − 2) mod (x0 + 2) = 0}, x) + 2
                                                     0
                                           where 2x +2 − 2 := loop(λ(x00 , i00 ). (x00 + 1) × 2, x0 , 2)
          Prime characteristic function    (loop(λ(x, i).i × x, x, x) mod (x + 1)) mod 2




3       Results

The code for our project is available in this repository [7]. A user can also test our system using
the web interface http://grid01.ciirc.cvut.cz/~thibault/qsynt.html.

    We report on the number of solutions found during self-learning. At generation 0, the
search finds 5247 16-solutions (covering the first 16 elements of an OEIS sequence) using a
tree neural network initialized with random weights. After generation 11, we get 37400 16-
solutions. After 100 generations, more than 50000 OEIS sequences had their first 16 elements
generated by at least one program. Figure 1 measures our programs’ ability to cover sequences
for increasing value of n. Extrapolating the plot, we can conjecture that the percentage of
solutions that generalize to arbitrary inputs converges towards 40%. In Table 1, solutions for
famous sequences are presented. Each of these three solutions was manually proven to match
the description given by OEIS editors for the corresponding sequence.

    In the future, our priority will be to increase the number of tested inputs before declaring
a program to be a solution. With this change, we should observe a decrease in the number of
solutions but those solutions will be more likely to generalize to larger inputs.




2
                                                                                                          Page 54

Synthesis of Programs                                                                      T. Gauthier


References
[1] Matej Balog, Alexander L. Gaunt, Marc Brockschmidt, Sebastian Nowozin, and Daniel Tarlow.
    Deepcoder: Learning to write programs. In 5th International Conference on Learning Represen-
    tations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track Proceedings. OpenRe-
    view.net, 2017.
[2] Jasmin Christian Blanchette and Tobias Nipkow. Nitpick: A counterexample generator for higher-
    order logic based on a relational model finder. In Interactive Theorem Proving, First International
    Conference, ITP 2010, Edinburgh, UK, July 11-14, 2010. Proceedings, pages 131–146, 2010.
[3] Lukas Bulwahn. The new Quickcheck for Isabelle - random, exhaustive and symbolic testing under
    one roof. In Certified Programs and Proofs - Second International Conference, CPP 2012, Kyoto,
    Japan, December 13-15, 2012. Proceedings, pages 92–108, 2012.
[4] Koen Claessen, Moa Johansson, Dan Rosén, and Nicholas Smallbone. Automating inductive proofs
    using theory exploration. In Maria Paola Bonacina, editor, Conference on Automated Deduction
    (CADE), volume 7898 of LNCS, pages 392–406. Springer, 2013.
[5] Bruce Nielson and Daniel C. Elton.          Induction, popper, and machine learning.        CoRR,
    abs/2110.00840, 2021.
[6] Neil J. A. Sloane. The on-line encyclopedia of integer sequences. In Manuel Kauers, Manfred Kerber,
    Robert Miner, and Wolfgang Windsteiger, editors, Towards Mechanized Mathematical Assistants,
    14th Symposium, Calculemus 2007, 6th International Conference, MKM 2007, Hagenberg, Austria,
    June 27-30, 2007, Proceedings, volume 4573 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, page 130.
    Springer, 2007.
[7] Gauthier Thibault. Software accompanying the paper "Program Synthesis for the OEIS". https:
    //github.com/barakeel/oeis-synthesis, 2022.




                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                             Page 55




      Project Proposal: Formal Ethics Ontology in SUMO∗
         Zarathustra Amadeus Goertzel1 , Adam Pease2 , and Josef Urban1
                       1
                           Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic
                               2
                                 Articulate Software, San Jose, CA, USA

    We propose a project to formalize a portion of ethical theory. AI ethics and AI safety
are growing fields that aim to study how AI can be used in safe and beneficial manners for
humans. There are arguments for shifting the focus from AI ethics to computational ethics (see
Segun [14]), which is the field of studying how to make ethical decisions computationally. Ethics
can be seen as encompassing many approaches to the “human safety problem” and porting the
lessons learned in the field should help clarify the domain of AI and computational ethics. In
this proposal, the three primary ethical paradigms, utilitarianism, deontology, and virtue ethics,
will be expressed in a multi-agent reinforcement learning (RL) model.
    The other goal is to formally define ethics and these paradigms in SUMO. The Suggested
Upper Merged Ontology (SUMO) [9,10] is a comprehensive ontology of around 20,000 concepts
and 80,000 hand-authored logical statements in a higher-order logic that has an associated inte-
grated development environment called Sigma [11]1 that interfaces to leading theorem provers
such as E [13] and Vampire [5]. Previous work in logical formalizations of ethical theories [4]
has been limited to work strictly on ethics itself without support from a larger formalization
of objects, human actions, and events that form the situations in which ethical decisions take
place. SUMO provides that context and allows us the potential to create a more practical
formalization that is situated in the real world, with its complexity of choices and influences.
Summary of Ethical Paradigms: Ethics is “the normative science of the conduct of human
beings living in society, which judges this conduct to be right or wrong, to be good or bad, or
in some similar way” [7].
    The paradigm of virtue ethics specifies the psychological traits of an agent such that the
agent’s behavior will be good, deontology seeks to develop rules by which to judge behavior,
and utilitarianism asserts that the goal is to maximize well-being and minimize suffering among
all involved in a society; any effective action to this end is judged to be good 2 .
    There have been many attempts to justify the particular paradigms and to argue from first
principles that such-and-such a way is the “correct” or “rational” way to judge conduct. Virtues
and deontological rules are often implicitly justified as necessary for humans to harmoniously
and cooperatively live in a society. There have been many debates on whether ethical judg-
ments are objectively universal or simply subjective assertions. The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy (SEP) article on The Definition of Morarality states that normative claims on how
agents ’ought’ to act are usually justified as codes of conduct that “would be put forth by all
rational people” [3]. Kant distinguished hypothetical and categorical imperatives and tried to
argue for the truth of some categorical imperatives that apply for all subjective goals, which
involved the claim that all people by ’natural necessity’ desire their own happiness. Happiness
as an axiomatic goal also appears in Aristotle’s virtue ethics as ‘”eudaimonia” (a state of well-
being) [6] and Mill, the author of Utilitarianism [8], considers the fact that “happiness is good”
to be self-evident and without further proof [2].

  ∗ Supported by the ERC Consolidator grant no. 649043 AI4REASON and by the Czech project AI&Reasoning

CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15 003/ 0000466 and the European Regional Development Fund.
   1 https://www.ontologyportal.org
   2 E.g., “be an honest person”, “do not lie”, and “say whatever will bring about the best consequences.”
                                                                                                          Page 56

Formal Ethics                                                                    Goertzel, Pease, Urban


    Grounding ethical theory in a formal ontology should help to make clear what can and
cannot be said about objective norms and subjective assessments in multi-agent settings, such
as human society, thus this proposal focuses on developing a common framework that is agnostic
to conjectures about the nature of ’value’ by which meta-ethical or axiological axioms may be
proposed, their consequences explored (with automation), and proofs attempted.
Multi-agent reinforcement learning model: The multi-agent RL model includes a set
of states (S) of the environment and agents (N = {1, . . . , n}); a set of actions for each agent
(A(s) = A1 (s) × An (s)); a stochastic transition structure from actions to probability measures
over the states (T (s, a)); a reward function for each agent that depends on the old state, the ac-
tions, and the new state (ri (s, a, s0 )); and the agent’s policy that outputs an action for each state
(πi (s)) [1, 16]. The goal is for agents to maximize their expected reward (contingent on what
other agents do), which may be technically enough to represent diverse value landscapes [15].
     The ethical paradigms can be expressed in this model by the additional of a societal coher-
ence constraint, v, that must be (approximately) satisfied by each agent i while maximizing the
expected reward ri .

   1. Utilitarianism holds that for every agent, i, v(s, a, s0 ) = i ri (s, a, s0 ) should be maxi-
                                                                       P
       mized in each step.

    2. Deontology encodes ethical rules into an evaluation of actions, v(s, a, s0 ) → {good, bad},
       and holds that agents should always take ’good’ actions.

    3. Virtue ethics judges psychological processes with v(s, a, s0 ) → {virtous, vicious} and holds
       that should maintain ’virtuous’ inner states and implementations.

Additionally, utilitarianism under the term ’consequentialism’ often stipulates that only the
consequences, s0 , matter for v and ri . Deontology emphasizes the actions, a, and virtues em-
phasize the state from which action is taken, s, suggesting that the paradigms are complemen-
tary. Specifying the interrelationships between these approaches may mirror the Curry–Howard
correspondence between logic and programming languages.
Relation to AI Ethics and Safety: Humans have developed much common sense about
ethical behavior, and AI safety research often focuses on the RL paradigm, so formalizing the
main paradigms in the RL model should help leverage this knowledge when studying how to
design and cooperate with AI. For AI ethics applied to military uses, conditional reasoning is
valuable, such as, “if one believes the use of remotely piloted drones to be ethically justified, then
I present an argument one should also support the use of automated weapon systems” [12]. The
combination of international codes of ethics with automated reasoning and councils of ethicists
is also mentioned. There is room for neuro-symbolic integration as AI systems learn to behave
ethically. This suggests that for some purposes, a common ontology should be helpful.
Initial work in SUMO focuses on formalizing a standard ethical dilemma about organ
transplants. Suppose there is a surgeon, a healthy patient, and a patient who will die without a
kidney transplant. The dilemma is that utilitarianism superficially recommends the surgeon to
perform the kidney transplant from the healthy patient without regard to consent, for by most
metrics, two non-terminally ill people will result in greater happiness and less pain than one.
Deontologically, there are ethical codes such as “first, do no harm” and to require “informed
consent” before operating. The formalization should allow for computer-assisted exploration of
what outcomes different axiomatic principles and definitions will result in, advancing the field
of computational ethics.

2
                                                                                                          Page 57

Formal Ethics                                                                    Goertzel, Pease, Urban


References
 [1] Peter Albrecht, Stefano; Stone. Multiagent learning: Foundations and recent trends. tuto-
     rial. https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~larg/ijcai17_tutorial/multiagent_learning.pdf. IJCAI-
     17 conference.
 [2] Julia Driver. The History of Utilitarianism. In Edward N. Zalta, editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia
     of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, Winter 2014 edition, 2014.
 [3] Bernard Gert and Joshua Gert. The Definition of Morality. In Edward N. Zalta, editor, The
     Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, Fall 2020
     edition, 2020.
 [4] Ganascia J.-G. Ethical system formalization using non-monotonic logics. In Proc. of the Cognitive
     Science conference (CogSci2007), 2007.
 [5] Laura Kovács and Andrei Voronkov. First-order theorem proving and vampire. In Proceedings
     of the 25th International Conference on Computer Aided Verification, volume 8044 of CAV 2013,
     pages 1–35, New York, NY, USA, 2013. Springer-Verlag New York, Inc.
 [6] Richard Kraut. Aristotle’s Ethics. In Edward N. Zalta, editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of
     Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, Summer 2022 edition, 2022.
 [7] William Lillie. An Introduction to Ethics. New York: Barnes & Noble, 1948.
 [8] J. S. Mill. Utilitarianism. Oxford University Press UK, 1861.
 [9] Ian Niles and Adam Pease. Toward a Standard Upper Ontology. In Chris Welty and Barry
     Smith, editors, Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Formal Ontology in Information
     Systems (FOIS-2001), pages 2–9, 2001.
[10] Adam Pease. Ontology: A Practical Guide. Articulate Software Press, Angwin, CA, 2011.
[11] Adam Pease and Stephan Schulz. Knowledge Engineering for Large Ontologies with Sigma KEE
     3.0. In The International Joint Conference on Automated Reasoning, 2014.
[12] Eric Reisen. The moral case for the development of autonomous weapon systems, Feb 2022.
[13] Stephan Schulz. E - A Brainiac Theorem Prover. AI Commun., 15(2-3):111–126, 2002.
[14] Samuel T. Segun. From machine ethics to computational ethics. AI and Society, 36(1):263–276,
     2021.
[15] David Silver, Satinder Singh, Doina Precup, and Richard S. Sutton. Reward is enough. Artificial
     Intelligence, 299:103535, 2021.
[16] Koundinya Vajjha, Avraham Shinnar, Barry M. Trager, Vasily Pestun, and Nathan Fulton. Certrl:
     formalizing convergence proofs for value and policy iteration in coq. In Catalin Hritcu and Andrei
     Popescu, editors, CPP ’21: 10th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Certified Programs
     and Proofs, Virtual Event, Denmark, January 17-19, 2021, pages 18–31. ACM, 2021.




                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                     Page 58

Formal Ethics                                                               Goertzel, Pease, Urban


A       First-order transplant scenario in SUMO
The following SUMO formulas specify the situation of the organ transplant dilemma and the
inference that should take place if there is informed consent (under a deontological paradigm
with this standard ethical code). The formulas are expressed in first-order logic without modal
operators because their translation from SUMO to TPTP is a work in progress and this is easier
as a proof-of-concept.
The setting is declared that there is a HospitalBuilding where three non-equal humans are
located and two of them are patients of the other. One human is healthy and the other human
is terminally ill.
(instance Hospital HospitalBuilding)
(instance Surgeon0 Human)
(instance Human1 Human)
(instance HealthyHuman Human)

(not (equal Surgeon0 Human1))
(not (equal Surgeon0 HealthyHuman))
(not (equal HealthyHuman Human1))

(located Surgeon0 Hospital)
(located Human1 Hospital)
(located HealthyHuman Hospital)

(patientMedical Human1 Surgeon0)
(patientMedical HealthyHuman Surgeon0)

(attribute HealthyHuman Healthy)
(attribute Human1 FatalDisease)

A Definition of terminally ill as meaning there’s a greater than 99% chance the patient will die.
As well as a specification that healthy primates have two kidneys.
(=>
      (instance ?DISEASE FatalDisease)
      (and
           (diseaseMortality ?DISEASE ?RATE)
           (greaterThan ?RATE 0.99)))

(=>
      (and
          (instance ?H Primate)
          (instance ?D DiseaseOrSyndrome)
          (not
              (attribute ?H ?D)))
      (exists (?K1 ?K2)
          (and
              (instance ?K1 Kidney)
              (instance ?K2 Kidney)
              (not
                  (equal ?K1 ?K2))
              (part ?K1 ?H)
              (part ?K2 ?H))))


4
                                                                                                       Page 59

Formal Ethics                                                                 Goertzel, Pease, Urban


A specification that the dying patient has an impaired kidney and needs a kidney that is not
impaired. Moreover, the healthy patient has two healthy kidneys.
(attribute Human1 (ImpairedBodyPartFn Kidney))
(needs Human1 K1)
(instance K1 Kidney)
(not (attribute K1 (ImpairedBodyPartFn Kidney)))

(instance HealthyKidney1 Kidney)
(instance HealthyKidney2 Kidney)
(part HealthyKidney1 HealthyHuman)
(part HealthyKidney2 HealthyHuman)
(not (equal HealthyKidney1 HealthyKidney2))
(not (attribute HealthyKidney1 (ImpairedBodyPartFn Kidney)))
(not (attribute HealthyKidney2 (ImpairedBodyPartFn Kidney)))

A definition of an organ transplant as a subclass of the Surgery class and the Substitution class.
(subclass OrganTransplant Surgery)
(subclass OrganTransplant Substitution)

(=>
      (instance ?Trans OrganTransplant)
      (exists (?Sur ?Org ?Pat ?Don)
          (and
              (attribute ?Sur Surgeon)
              (instance ?Don Human)
              (instance ?Pat Human)
              (instance ?Org Organ)
              (agent ?Trans ?Sur)
              (origin ?Trans ?Don)
              (patient ?Trans ?Org)
              (destination ?Trans ?Pat))))

The statement that there is the capacity for the organ transplant to take place.
(capability OrganTransplant destination Human1)
(capability OrganTransplant patient HealthyKidney1)
(capability OrganTransplant origin HealthyHuman)
(capability OrganTransplant agent Surgeon0)

A first-order instance of the inference neded to declare that the surgeon can perform the surgery
if informed consent is provided.
(=>
      (attribute Surgeon0 InformedConsent)
      (and
           (instance Transplant1 OrganTransplant)
           (destination Transplant1 Human1)
           (patient Transplant1 HealthyKidney1)
           (origin Transplant1 HealthyHuman)
           (agent Transplant1 Surgeon0)))

The inference in “deontological style” is tested via loading the transplant.kif file into Sigma and
querying Vampire.

                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                     Page 60

Formal Ethics                                                               Goertzel, Pease, Urban


First, the following assertion is needed:
(attribute Surgeon0 InformedConsent)

Next the following query may be posed:
(agent Transplant1 ?X)

Answer ?X = Surgeon0

An ethical conjecture is that one with the virtue of practical wisdom will still require consent
before performing an organ transplant surgery (even if there is no formal ethical code). With
modal operators, this reasoning will be more distinct from the deontological case above.
(=>
      (attribute Surgeon0 PracticalWisdom)
      (and
           (=>
               (attribute Surgeon0 Consent)
               (and
                   (instance Transplant1 OrganTransplant)
                   (destination Transplant1 Human1)
                   (patient Transplant1 HealthyKidney1)
                   (origin Transplant1 HealthyHuman)
                   (agent Transplant1 Surgeon0)))
           (=>
               (not (attribute Surgeon0 Consent))
               (not
                   (exists (?Transplant)
                       (and
                           (instance ?Transplant OrganTransplant)
                           (destination ?Transplant Human1)
                           (patient ?Transplant HealthyKidney1)
                           (origin ?Transplant HealthyHuman)
                           (agent ?Transplant Surgeon0)))))))

The following assertsions are needed:
(attribute Surgeon0 PracticalWisdom)
(attribute Surgeon0 Consent)

One can also query whether an organ transplant took place:
(instance ?X OrganTransplant)

Answer ?X = Transplant1

The proofs of these queries as well as additional work will be hosted on the public github repo:
https://github.com/zariuq/Formalization-of-Ethical-Theory---AITP.




6
                                                                                                     Page 61




             LightGBM Hyperparameter Optimization
           for Clause Classification in Theorem Proving ∗
Zarathustra Goertzel1 , Jan Jakubův1,2 , Mikoláš Janota1 , and Cezary Kaliszyk2
                 1
                     Czech Technical University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic
                            2
                              University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria



1    Motivation: Machine Learning in Theorem Proving
Applications of machine learning (ML) in automated theorem proving (ATP) often involve
training of models from large datasets. This training is usually performed by some machine
learning framework, and there are many frameworks to choose from. However, many machine
learning methods are parametrized and quite often using the right hyperparameter values is
essential to achieve good prediction results. In our experiments with the ML theorem prover
ENIGMA [6, 7, 3, 5], we have selected hyperparameter values based on our experience, or we’ve
performed a grid search over some set of possible values. Additionally, as a part of our recent
experiments with ENIGMA on Isabelle [4], we have implemented an automated hyperparameter
selection tool lgbtune.1 While this tool has been successfully used during the experiments, its
performance has never been evaluated in detail, and this is the main topic of this work.
    ENIGMA is a machine learning guidance system for automated theorem prover E [9]. E’s
input is a first-order logic problem consisting of axioms and a conjecture to be proved. This
problem is translated to first order clauses, and a proof search based on a given clause loop
is launched in the space of clauses. In each step of this proof search, one unprocessed clause,
called given, is selected for processing. The given clause selection is one of the most important
choice points performed during the proof search, and this is where ENIGMA guides the prover.
    ENIGMA experiments are done using the training/evaluation loop. Given a set of benchmark
problems P, we run E over all problems P. We analyze successful proof searches, and clauses
selected during the search are classified as useful and useless. The clauses that participate
in the final proof are considered useful, while the others are useless because their processing
might have been avoided. On thusly labeled clauses, we train a machine learning model M to
distinguish useful clauses from useless ones. Model M is then used to guide next E search over
problems P. This results in new successful proof searches used to construct new training data
for the next iteration of the training/evaluation loop.
    As the underlying machine learning method, ENIGMA can use decision trees or graph neural
networks. In this work we concentrate on hyperparameter setting for training of decision tree
models. ENIGMA support two decision tree frameworks: XGBoost [2] and LightGBM [8].
Recently, we favor LightGBM because it is faster and more stable on large training data. The
data input for the LightGBM trainer are labeled clauses (as useful/useless) represented by
numeric feature vectors. The training data we encounter with ENIGMA are quite specific and
consist of a large amount (millions of clauses) of long (single vector length over 60k) but sparse
vectors (around 1% of non-zero values). Apart from the training vectors, the LightGBM trainer
take other hyperparameters as an input. We target this topic in the rest of this work.
  ∗ Supported by the ERC Project SMART Starting Grant no. 714034, and by the Czech MEYS under the

ERC CZ project POSTMAN no. LL1902.
   1 https://github.com/ai4reason/enigmatic/blob/master/enigmatic/lgbtune.py
                                                                                                      Page 62

LightGBM Hyperparameter Optimization for ATPs                     Goertzel,Jakubův,Janota,Kaliszyk


2    LightGBM Hyperparameter Tuning
LightGBM supports few dozens of hyperparameters that influence the model training process.
While many of them might be safely used with their default values, setting of some hyperpa-
rameters is crucial for success and to prevent overfitting. While there exist basic guidelines
for setting of hyperparameters, setting them in practice often requires experience and under-
standing of the training process. There are, however, automated tools to search for suitable
parameter values like Optuna [1] or FLAML [10] which support LightGBM. For our experiments
with ENIGMA, we have developed our tool lgbtune to search for suitable values of LightGBM
hyperparameters targeted to our specific ATP needs.
    Our tool lgbtune is implemented in Optuna. Given the training data, it keeps a small
amount of the training data (5%) for a later independent evaluation, and it trains the models
only on the rest. Then it proceeds in phases when it tries to search optimal values for selected
hyperparameters, different ones in each phase. In each phase, several values of tuned hyperpa-
rameters are tried, and the resulting models are evaluated on the part of input data not used
for training. The best hyperparameter values are then fixed in the phases to follow.
    Some of the hyperparameters are dependent, that is, the optimal value of one parame-
ter might depend on the value of another one. For example, the optimal number of tree leaves
might depend on the maximal tree depth. We tune dependent parameters together in one phase.
In phase (1) we tune probably the most influential parameter, that is, the number of leaves
(leaves) in a decision tree. We set the tree depth (max depth) to unlimited and thus we elimi-
nate one dependent parameter. In other phases we then tune (2) randomized feature sampling
(bagging_fraction, bagging_freq), (3) the minimal number of data in leaves (min data),
and (4) L1/L2 regularization terms (lambda l1, lambda_l2). Value selection mechanism and
distribution are derived from Optuna.


3    Machine Learning and ATP Evaluation
In lgbtune, the quality of a model is estimated based on its accuracy on the shelved training
data. This ML evaluation should correlate with the actual performance of the prover guided
by the model, that is, with ATP evaluation. However, this is not always the case, because
the training data are typically unbalanced, and more than 90% are typically negative training
samples (clauses classified as useless). Hence it is crucial to compute separately accuracies
on positive and negative testing samples. Moreover, it seems that the positive accuracy is
even more important for ATP evaluation. This can be explained by the behavior of E, where
accidental processing of a single useless clause does not need to do much harm, while postponing
of the processing of a useful clause can effectively block any path to success. Hence we measure
the quality of a model as 2pos + neg, where pos and neg are positive and negative accuracies.
    We have successfully used lgbtune during our recent ENIGMA experiments [4], where it
helped us to increase the accuracy of models by more than 5%. In this presentation, we would
like to present our tool, and, additionally, perform an extended evaluation and testing of our
tool (the extended evaluation is currently in progress). We will evaluate the ATP performance
of trained models and test our assumptions about the correlation of ML and ATP performance.
Furthermore, we would like to evaluate the impact of a different phase orders during the tuning,
and the importance of tuned parameters. This could help us to decide which phases should
be given more time, and which phases should be removed. Finally, lgbtune is motivated by
LightGBM plugins from Optuna and FLAML, and we would like to compare directly with their
performance. All the experiments will be targeted to data from our ATP experiments.

2
                                                                                                         Page 63

LightGBM Hyperparameter Optimization for ATPs                        Goertzel,Jakubův,Janota,Kaliszyk


References
 [1] Takuya Akiba, Shotaro Sano, Toshihiko Yanase, Takeru Ohta, and Masanori Koyama. Optuna:
     A next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework. In Proceedings of the 25rd ACM
     SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2019.
 [2] Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In KDD, pages
     785–794. ACM, 2016.
 [3] Karel Chvalovský, Jan Jakubův, Martin Suda, and Josef Urban. ENIGMA-NG: efficient neural and
     gradient-boosted inference guidance for E. In CADE, volume 11716 of Lecture Notes in Computer
     Science, pages 197–215. Springer, 2019.
 [4] Zarathustra Amadeus Goertzel, Jan Jakubuv, Cezary Kaliszyk, Miroslav Olsák, Jelle Piepenbrock,
     and Josef Urban. The isabelle ENIGMA. CoRR, abs/2205.01981, 2022.
 [5] Jan Jakubův, Karel Chvalovský, Miroslav Olsák, Bartosz Piotrowski, Martin Suda, and Josef Ur-
     ban. ENIGMA anonymous: Symbol-independent inference guiding machine (system description).
     In IJCAR (2), volume 12167 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 448–463. Springer, 2020.
 [6] Jan Jakubův and Josef Urban. ENIGMA: efficient learning-based inference guiding machine. In
     CICM, volume 10383 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 292–302. Springer, 2017.
 [7] Jan Jakubův and Josef Urban. Enhancing ENIGMA given clause guidance. In CICM, volume
     11006 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 118–124. Springer, 2018.
 [8] Guolin Ke, Qi Meng, Thomas Finley, Taifeng Wang, Wei Chen, Weidong Ma, Qiwei Ye, and Tie-
     Yan Liu. Lightgbm: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision tree. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike
     von Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and Roman
     Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on
     Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pages
     3146–3154, 2017.
 [9] Stephan Schulz. E - A Brainiac Theorem Prover. AI Commun., 15(2-3):111–126, 2002.
[10] Chi Wang, Qingyun Wu, Markus Weimer, and Erkang Zhu. Flaml: A fast and lightweight automl
     library. In MLSys, 2021.




                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                  Page 64

                      A Corpus for Precise Natural Language Inference




   We propose a corpus for tasks related to natural language inference. The corpus contains logical puz-
zles in natural language from two domains: comparing puzzles and truth-telling puzzles. For instance:
Example 1 (Comparison puzzle) Ross is older than Rachel who is younger than Phoebe. Joey is older
than Monica but younger than Rachel. Phoebe is younger than Ross. Who is the tallest? Is Phoebe older
than Monica? Is Ross younger than Joey? (Figure 1)
   First, note that the text in the queries does not explicitly appear within the text of the puzzle. Since
reasoning is mandatory to answer, approaches based only on machine learning may not suffice. Solutions
based on reasoning or hybrid approaches will be required by this puzzle-based corpus. Second, note that
some background knowledge is required: older and younger are transitive relations, or the definition of
concept tallest. Third, good puzzles have two properties: (i) each piece of information is necessary and
(ii) no unnecessary information is provided. These properties make puzzles interesting candidates for
machine comprehension tasks. Fourth, since the solution of the puzzle is clear, one can void the cases
of mislabelling the text due to subjective annotation or human biases. Recall the many troublesome
annotations with the SICK dataset identified by Kalouli et al. [Kalouli et al.2017], in which 611 pairs
out 9,840 does not make sense. Fifth, there is wide range of logical puzzles with available solutions1
that can be collected and adapted for building such puzzle based corpus, starting with simple ones (e.g.
comparison puzzles) and continuing with more complex ones (e.g. zebra puzzles). Sixth, the existing
work on automatic puzzle generation combined with the work on natural language generation can be
used to automatically create such puzzle-based benchmarks for precise inference tasks. One example are
the 382 knights and knaves puzzles popularised by Raymond Smullyan and automatically generated by
Lau and Chan2 . The complexity of these puzzles depends on the number of the individuals ranging from
2 to 9 individuals. The above aspects can be discussed during the workshop to clarify the best way for
delivering a puzzle-based benchmark for question answering.


                            you                    Question                         Theorem in FOL                Answer
             er                   nge
         old       Ross              r             Is Ross the tallest ?            tallest(Ross)                 Entailment
                  younger                          Is Monica the shortest ?         shortest(M onica)             Entailment
                                                   Is Phoebe older than Monica ?    older(P hoebe, M onica)       Entailment
         yo                                        Is Monica younger than Joey ?    younger(M onica, Joey)        Entailment
              un                           Nurse




Rachel          ge                       Phoebe
                  r                                Is Rachel the tallest ?          tallest(Rachel)               Contradiction
                            older                  Is Phoebe the shortest ?         shortest(P hoebe)             Contradiction
                                                   Is Monica older than Phoebe ?    older(M onica, P hoebe)       Contradiction
                                                   Is Ross younger than Joey?       younger(Ross, Joey)           Contradiction
                  Joey            Monica
(a) Information extracted from Puzzle 1                  (b) Sample of atomic question with 4 predicates and 5 individuals

                      Figure 1: Question answering for unambiguous comparison puzzles

   Automatically solving such text-based puzzles requires several technical challenges. Consider the
following puzzle with two friends:
  1
    Consider for instance many sites like https://www.brainzilla.com/logic/zebra/, https:
//www.ahapuzzles.com/logic/logic-puzzles,              https://www.mathsisfun.com/puzzles/
logic-puzzles-index.html to name a few
  2
    https://philosophy.hku.hk/think/logic/knights.php
                                                                                                                     Page 65

                   I always tell the truth!                                         We are both single!


                        I always lie!

   Married                                   Single                     Joey                              Chandler
                                   Figure 2: A truth-telling puzzle with two characters


Example 2 (Truth telling puzzle) In the Central Perk cafe there is this particular behaviour: married
people don’t lie, while single people always lie. While Joey and Chandler were sitting on the sofa a
woman is approaching them and asked: “Are you married?” Joey promptly replied: “We are both
single!” Can the woman figure out weather the two friends are married or not? (Figure 2)
   When translating the puzzle into some logical formalism (e.g. First Order Logic [Groza and
Nitu2022] using NLTK [Perkins2014] and Prover9 [McCune2005] or Description Logics using for in-
stance FRED [Gangemi et al.2017]), a machine comprehension tool should handle various technical
challenges including: (i) recognising the named entities (e.g. Joey, Chandler); (ii) coreference resolu-
tion (e.g. ”We are both single”); (iii) automatically computing the domain size for model finders (e.g.
Mace4), (iv) reducing the interpretation models to a single one (e.g. adding the unique name assumption,
adding relevant background knowledge, closing the world, removing isomorphic models).
   For each puzzle one can generate a large set of questions, as exemplified in the right part of Figure 1.
Each puzzle can be associated with the entire set of atomic questions that can be generated based on
the relations and individuals occurring in the text [Szomiu and Groza2021]. If the puzzle has a unique
solution, there should be only pairs labelled as ”entailment” and ”contradiction”. To obtain unknown
pairs, one can remove some clues from the puzzle. The resulted ambiguous puzzle will have several
interpretation models, in which the statements can be proved as true (entailment), false (contradiction),
or unknown (if they appear true or false in the computed models.
   In line with the work of Pease et al. [Pease et al.2020], we propose a corpus for reasoning tasks. The
puzzle-based corpus may benefit from the huge number of puzzle available that provide unique solutions.
Apart from the comparison and truth-telling puzzles exemplified here, the corpus can be extended with
various types of logical puzzles [Groza2021].


References
Aldo Gangemi, Valentina Presutti, Diego Reforgiato Recupero, Andrea Giovanni Nuzzolese, Francesco Draicchio,
  and Misael Mongiovi. 2017. Semantic web machine reading with FRED. Semantic Web, 8(6):873–893.

Adrian Groza and Cristian Nitu. 2022. Question answering over logic puzzles using theorem proving. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 37th ACM/SIGAPP Symposium on Applied Computing, pages 871–874.

Adrian Groza. 2021. Modelling Puzzles in First Order Logic. Springer International Publishing.
Aikaterini-Lida Kalouli, Livy Real, and Valeria De Paiva. 2017. Textual inference: getting logic from humans. In
  IWCS 2017-12th International Conference on Computational Semantics—Short papers.
William McCune. 2005. Prover9. University of New México.
Adam Pease, Paulo Santos, and Alexandre Rademaker. 2020. A corpus of spatial reasoning problems. In 5th
  Conf. on Artificial Intelligence and Theorem Proving, September 13-19, 2020, Aussois, France.

Jacob Perkins. 2014. Python 3 text processing with NLTK 3 cookbook. Packt Publishing Ltd.
Roxana Szomiu and Adrian Groza. 2021. A puzzle-based dataset for natural language inference. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2112.05742.
                                                                                                              Page 66




          LISA: Towards a Foundational Theorem Prover
                     Simon Guilloud , Florian Cassayre, Viktor Kunčak
                        EPFL IC LARA, Station 14, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
                            {Simon.Guilloud,Viktor.Kuncak}@epfl.ch

    We present the foundations and initial implementation of a new interactive theorem prover, named
LISA. In a slight contrast to most popular type-theoretic frameworks, and much like Mizar [9], LISA
aims to use classical mainstream foundations of mathematics, taking a hint, among others from the talk of
John Harrison in this very venue in 2018 [12]. LISA uses (single-sorted) first order logic (with schematic
variables) as the syntactic framework and set theory axiom schemas as the semantic framework. On top of
these foundations we can construct numbers and other mathematical theories and models of computation
without introducing new axioms. As the target use of LISA we envision mathematical statements as
well as formal proofs of computer programs and systems, possibly with probabilistic and distributed
behavior. For automation in LISA we expect to employ newly developed algorithms for equivalence
checking of formulas and proofs [4], existing high-performance superposition-based theorem provers
such as Vampire [7], SPASS [13], E [10] and Zipperposition, as well as SMT solvers such as Z3 [8],
CVC5 [?], and veriT [11], and OpenSMT [2]. An important aim of LISA is interoperability with other
proof assistants. We hope that the design of LISA with small, fresh code base, simple foundation and
explicit proof objects will encourage building bridges with other tools. We also expect that the system
will serve as a good vehicle to explore machine-learning guided superposition proof search, with learned
heuristics complementing hand-tuned ones. We also plan to explore high-level translation of proofs from
other systems into LISA, inspired by the success of deep neural networks in natural language translation.

Development LISA is separated into a trusted logical core called the kernel that we keep as small as
possible, and a front part adding arbitrarily complex or powerful layers of abstractions and features for
the user, but which need not be trusted. Our language of choice for LISA is Scala (version 3). On one
hand, Scala offers very powerful syntax and features, such as dependent types, string interpolation and
implicits, which allows (for example) to use Scala compiler to check that terms are well formed, or to
define very nice syntax for proofs or objects we want to manipulate. On the other hand, the kernel is
developed only with a restricted subset of the Scala language, paving the door for future verification of
the kernel using program verification tools such as Stainless [5].
    We strived to keep the core of LISA as close as possible to well-known and uncontroversial math-
ematical theory, but nonetheless includes some improvements, in particular relating to space and time
complexity. Hence, our base language is first order logic, to which we add schematic functions and
predicates. Those schematic symbols give some flavour of second-order logic, the possibility to define a
single syntactic object representing an axiom schema or theorem schema. Our experience already sug-
gests that schematic variables make many further developpements and proofs simpler, but do not increase
the proof strength of FOL.
    LISA kernel’s proof checker is based on an implementation of Gentzen’s sequent calculus, with the
addition of some deduced proof steps such as the substitution of equals for equals and the possibility to
enclose subproofs to reduce the length of proofs.
    Proofs in LISA are represented as linearized directed acyclic graphs (i.e. lists of proof steps), which
can verified by the proof checker. Proofs can either exists in isolation, or be part of theories. Theories
in LISA form the LCF part of the kernel. They use the proof checker to verify theorems, and to then
accept such theorems as assumptions of future proofs without needing rechecking. Theories also enable
introduction of (set theoretic) axioms and definitional extensions of new symbols.
                                                                                                                  Page 67

easychair: Running title head is undefined.                                           S. Guilloud and V. Kunčak


Equivalence Checker A unique feature of our kernel is the inclusion of a quasilinear-time sufficient-
equivalence checker for FOL formulas that takes into account associativity, commutativity, and other
laws and has a clear algebraic completeness characterization [4]. The aim of implementing such equiv-
alence checker in the kernel is to shorten the proofs (by a constant factor), making the system more
efficient to use by humans and tactics alike.
     The equivalence checker takes into account properties of FOL such as alpha equivalence and symme-
try of equality, but most of its complexity take place at the level of propositional logic. Since equivalence
of propositional formulas is coNP complete, we can only aim for an approximation of it. Nonetheless,
it is important to note that our algorithm is not an arbitrary heuristic; it is a complete decision proce-
dure for a well-defined subalgebra of boolean algebra called orthocomplemented bisemilattice, which
is essentially Boolean algebra without the distributivity law. We expect that this aspect helps make the
equivalence checker predictable. Moreover, it runs in quasilinear time, meaning it can replace syntactic
equality checking everywhere in the proof checking procedure with only a logarithmic cost. Equiva-
lence checking algorithm is implemented using a combination of techniques for tree isomorphism with
memoization and term rewriting. Our anecodotal experience suggests that manual construction of proofs
greatly benefited from the implementation of this formula equivalence.

High Level Proofs We also succesfully implemented a semi-interactive interface to the logical kernel
allowing forward and backward reasoning, creation of new tactics and combination of existing ones, high
syntax insurance through Scala type checking, higher order matching and more. Works is still ongoing,
but it demonstrates the feasibility of designing a powerfull interface for the system.

Why set theory? Even though set theory is by far the most studied, accepted and well-known foun-
dation of mathematics, this choice is uncommon among interactive theorem provers and the Computer
Science community in general. Indeed, most modern ITPs such as Coq [1], Lean [3], Isabelle [14] or
the HOL-family [6] are based either on some form of Type Theory or on Higher Order Logic. While
those theory have the advantage to look closer from the start to the mathematical formalism, we believe
there are several reasons to prefer set theory. It may need higher upfront work, but we strongly believe
that through the use of powerful tactics and a soft type system (where types are represented by set or
class membership with meta-information for polymorphism) apposed on top of set theory, arbitrarily
familiarity in the writing of proofs can be achieved with set theory, with ultimately greater flexibility.
More arguments in favour of set theoretic foundations have been proposed by John Harrison [12].

Verification of Programs One of LISA’s goals is to contribute to verificaton of reliability of our com-
puting infrastructure. Medium term, we aim for two different paths for using LISA inside program
verifiers, such as Stainless, in which it can be cumbersome to reason about quantified propositions. On
the one hand, we hope to develop semantics of transition systems and programming languages and use
such semantics to provide high-confidence proofs about behavior of programs and embedded systems.

Future work and conclusion LISA is in early stage of development, which has focused on proof
checking for FOL with equality and schematic variables, as well as the support for theories and LCF-
style tracking of theoremhood. Most of the development dependent on set theoretic axiom schemas
remains in the future. Medium term goals include further development of abstraction layers and proof
tactics, development of a core library of results, implementation of the program verification side of LISA
and more exploratory work such as the tradeoff between , or the extension of our equivalence checker to
orthocomplemented lattices. We also had some exploratory work on the interoperability of proofs, and
we plan to continue to work on that aspect.

2
                                                                                                                     Page 68

easychair: Running title head is undefined.                                              S. Guilloud and V. Kunčak


References
 [1] Yves Bertot and Pierre Castéran. Interactive Theorem Proving and Program Development: Coq’Art: The
     Calculus of Inductive Constructions. Texts in Theoretical Computer Science. An EATCS Series. Springer-
     Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 2004.
 [2] Roberto Bruttomesso, Edgar Pek, Natasha Sharygina, and Aliaksei Tsitovich. The OpenSMT Solver. In David
     Hutchison, Takeo Kanade, Josef Kittler, Jon M. Kleinberg, Friedemann Mattern, John C. Mitchell, Moni Naor,
     Oscar Nierstrasz, C. Pandu Rangan, Bernhard Steffen, Madhu Sudan, Demetri Terzopoulos, Doug Tygar,
     Moshe Y. Vardi, Gerhard Weikum, Javier Esparza, and Rupak Majumdar, editors, Tools and Algorithms for
     the Construction and Analysis of Systems, volume 6015, pages 150–153. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin,
     Heidelberg, 2010.
 [3] Leonardo de Moura, Soonho Kong, Jeremy Avigad, Floris van Doorn, and Jakob von Raumer. The Lean
     Theorem Prover (System Description). In Amy P. Felty and Aart Middeldorp, editors, Automated Deduction
     - CADE-25, volume 9195, pages 378–388. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2015.
 [4] Simon Guilloud and Viktor Kuncak, editors. Equivalence Checking for Orthocomplemented Bisemilattices in
     Log-Linear Time. Springer, 2022.
 [5] Jad Hamza, Nicolas Voirol, and Viktor Kunčak. System FR: Formalized foundations for the Stainless verifier.
     Proc. ACM Program. Lang, 3, November 2019.
 [6] John Harrison. HOL Light: An Overview. In Stefan Berghofer, Tobias Nipkow, Christian Urban, and Makar-
     ius Wenzel, editors, Theorem Proving in Higher Order Logics, volume 5674, pages 60–66. Springer Berlin
     Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009.
 [7] Laura Kovács and Andrei Voronkov. First-Order Theorem Proving and Vampire. In Natasha Sharygina and
     Helmut Veith, editors, Computer Aided Verification, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 1–35, Berlin,
     Heidelberg, 2013. Springer.
 [8] Stephan Merz and Hernán Vanzetto. Automatic Verification of TLA + Proof Obligations with SMT Solvers. In
     Nikolaj Bjørner and Andrei Voronkov, editors, Logic for Programming, Artificial Intelligence, and Reasoning,
     Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 289–303, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012. Springer.
 [9] Adam Naumowicz and Artur Kornilowicz. A Brief Overview of Mizar. volume 5674, pages 67–72, August
     2009.
[10] Stephan Schulz. System Description: E 1.8. In Ken McMillan, Aart Middeldorp, and Andrei Voronkov,
     editors, Logic for Programming, Artificial Intelligence, and Reasoning, Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
     pages 735–743, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013. Springer.
[11] Hans-Jörg Schurr, Mathias Fleury, and Martin Desharnais. Reliable Reconstruction of Fine-grained Proofs in
     a Proof Assistant. In André Platzer and Geoff Sutcliffe, editors, Automated Deduction – CADE 28, Lecture
     Notes in Computer Science, pages 450–467, Cham, 2021. Springer International Publishing.
[12] John HarrisonAmazon Web Services. Let’s make set theory great again! axiomatic set theory, page 46.
[13] Christoph Weidenbach, Dilyana Dimova, Arnaud Fietzke, Rohit Kumar, Martin Suda, and Patrick Wis-
     chnewski. SPASS Version 3.5. In Renate A. Schmidt, editor, Automated Deduction – CADE-22, Lecture
     Notes in Computer Science, pages 140–145, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009. Springer.
[14] Makarius Wenzel, Lawrence C. Paulson, and Tobias Nipkow. The Isabelle Framework. In Otmane Ait Mo-
     hamed, César Muñoz, and Sofiène Tahar, editors, Theorem Proving in Higher Order Logics, Lecture Notes in
     Computer Science, pages 33–38, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008. Springer.




                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                          Page 69




                      Model Discovery for Efficient Search∗
                               Jan Hůla12 and Mikoláš Janota1
                  1
                      Czech Technical University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic
                           2
                             University of Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic


Motivation and overview. In this contribution, we focus on exploration strategies inspired
by human cognition. In comparison to AI search and learning, humans show greater efficiency
in terms of the number of states explored. This efficiency is mostly due to the fact that
humans have aversion towards prolonged periods of random exploration and most of the time
are following goal-oriented behavior. The goals often form a hierarchy and are proposed by
the person themselves. Moreover, the person is constantly tracking the expected difficulty of
achieving the given goal and, based on the ratio between this difficulty and the value of this
goal, they can decide to abandon the goal and instead pursue another.
    Goals are proposed and their difficulty is tracked using knowledge about a given domain. In
completely novel domains, in which it seems that random exploration will not lead to success,
the person typically starts by trying to create a mental model of the domain and then uses this
mental model to explore more effectively. For example, if they have already learned that keys
unlock doors and then find themselves in a locked room, they can temporarily set a goal to find
a key.
    Inspired by these observations, we design an agent which explores the state space by propos-
ing various sub-goals to itself. First, these sub-goals are curiosity-driven and their aim is to
incrementally learn a mental model of the domain. These sub-goals are later interleaved with
the original goals and their sub-goals. Each goal and sub-goal is being searched for with a
planner that leverages the mental model discovered thus far.

Related Work. Our work is related to a current trend of learning world models in model-
based reinforcement learning [6, 5, 12]. Such world models are represented as a neural network
which predicts state dynamics and rewards conditioned on the actions of the agent. The learned
world model can later be used by the agent to decide how to act in an online fashion or even to
learn the entire policy in an offline fashion. Our approach differs by the fact that in our case the
model is represented as a set of concepts and declarative statements which can be used by the
planner and learned incrementally. This different kind of learning [10, 1] overcomes many issues
inherent to learned statistical models such as catastrophic forgetting [9], failure to generalize
due to spurious correlations [8], inability to recompose old knowledge in novel ways [13], etc.
Another trend related to our work is the learnig to propose sub-goals research direction where
the goal is to train a neural network to propose sub-goals that are useful during the search
for the original goal. [14, 3]. In our case, the sub-goal proposal is manually engineered. Our
approach is also related to symbolic regression and ontology learning, where the goal is to
discover a symbolic model that explains or summarizes the observed data [4, 2].

Problem Domain. We study our approach in the domain of logical puzzles and simple
games. We chose this domain to avoid the complexity of real-world problems that are hard to
model precisely. Our aim is to learn and understand basic principles of efficient exploration in
  ∗ The results were supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports within the program ERC CZ

under the project POSTMAN no. LL1902.
                                                                                                      Page 70

Reinforcement Learning for Schedule Optimization                                       Hula, Janota


the simplified domain with the hope that later we would be able to include these principles in
a more complex approach scaling to realistic domains.
    Concretely, we study exploration strategies in games written in the video game descrip-
tion language (VGDL) [11]. VGDL enables one to define games in a few lines of declarative
statements. These declarative statements are divided into three categories: The first category
corresponds to the definitions of entity types and their default behavior, the second category
describes the interaction events between each pair of entity types, and the third category de-
scribes termination conditions. An example of a simple game defined in VGDL is visible in
Figure 1. To instantiate a concrete game, a rectangular grid of symbols representing different
entities is used. The VGDL engine parses this description into an instantly playable game.
    We propose an agent that learns the mechanistic model of the game to explore more effec-
tively. At each time step, our agent receives the current state of the board as input and outputs
one of the possible actions. The agent has the VGDL engine together with a planner in his
“head” but does not have access to the definition of the current game. Therefore, the initial
exploration aims to recover this definition by discovering the types of entities present in the
game and the effects of interaction between different pairs of entities. The recovered definition
is constantly updated and used by the VGDL engine to produce a “mental simulation” of a
possible evolution of the game. The planner is used to propose sub-goals which are either aimed
to observe the result of an interaction between a pair of entity types or to get the agent closer
to the original goal. After finding a “mental plan” for the currently schedule goal, the agent
executes the plan in the real game. The discrepancy between the imagined dynamics and the
real dynamics is used to update the mental model of the agent.
    As mentioned at the beginning of this section, we consider this simplistic domain as an
exploration playground for prototyping efficient search algorithms. We believe that the ability
to discover abstractions (in our case entities) and relations between them (in our case interaction
events) is a generally useful and interesting area of research, which is also related to theorem
proving where one can see an analogy in concept and lemma discovery [7]. We hope that this
work will inspire further research on model discovery for the purpose of efficient search and
reasoning.

    SpriteSet
        hole    > Immovable color=DARKBLUE
        avatar > MovingAvatar #cooldown=4
        box     > Passive
    InteractionSet
        avatar wall > stepBack
        box avatar > bounceForward
        box wall     > undoAll
        box box      > undoAll
        box hole     > killSprite
    TerminationSet
        SpriteCounter stype=box     limit=0 win=True


Figure 1: An example of a VGDL definition of a game (Sokoban). The concrete game also
requires a grid of symbols which defines the initial conditions of the game. SpriteSet contains
definitions of entity types and their default behavior, InteractionSet describes what happens
when two entities end up in a same position and TerminationSet describes termination condi-
tions.


2
                                                                                                          Page 71

Reinforcement Learning for Schedule Optimization                                           Hula, Janota


References
 [1] Susan Carey. The origin of concepts. Journal of Cognition and Development, 1(1):37–41, 2000.
 [2] Xinlei Chen, Abhinav Shrivastava, and Abhinav Kumar Gupta. Neil: Extracting visual knowledge
     from web data. 2013 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 1409–1416, 2013.
 [3] Konrad Czechowski, Tomasz Odrzygóźdź, Marek Zbysiński, Michal Zawalski, Krzysztof Olejnik,
     Yuhuai Wu, Lukasz Kuciński, and Piotr Miloś. Subgoal search for complex reasoning tasks. Ad-
     vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:624–638, 2021.
 [4] Kevin Ellis, Catherine Wong, Maxwell Nye, Mathias Sable-Meyer, Luc Cary, Lucas Morales,
     Luke Hewitt, Armando Solar-Lezama, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Dreamcoder: Growing gen-
     eralizable, interpretable knowledge with wake-sleep bayesian program learning. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2006.08381, 2020.
 [5] Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and
     James Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In International conference
     on machine learning, pages 2555–2565. PMLR, 2019.
 [6] Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with
     discrete world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02193, 2020.
 [7] Jónathan Heras, Ekaterina Komendantskaya, Moa Johansson, and Ewen Maclean. Proof-pattern
     recognition and lemma discovery in acl2. In International Conference on Logic for Programming
     Artificial Intelligence and Reasoning, pages 389–406. Springer, 2013.
 [8] Robert Kirk, Amy Zhang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. A survey of generalisation
     in deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.09794, 2021.
 [9] James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, An-
     drei A Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al.
     Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of
     sciences, 114(13):3521–3526, 2017.
[10] Dharshan Kumaran, Demis Hassabis, and James L McClelland. What learning systems do intelli-
     gent agents need? complementary learning systems theory updated. Trends in cognitive sciences,
     20(7):512–534, 2016.
[11] Tom Schaul. A video game description language for model-based or interactive learning. In 2013
     IEEE Conference on Computational Inteligence in Games (CIG), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2013.
[12] Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
     Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering Atari,
     Go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature, 588(7839):604–609, 2020.
[13] Paul Smolensky, R Thomas McCoy, Roland Fernandez, Matthew Goldrick, and Jianfeng Gao.
     Neurocompositional computing in human and machine intelligence: A tutorial. 2022.
[14] Josef Urban and Jan Jakubův. First neural conjecturing datasets and experiments. In International
     Conference on Intelligent Computer Mathematics, pages 315–323. Springer, 2020.




                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                             Page 72




           Selecting Quantifiers for Instantiation in SMT ∗
          Mikoláš Janota1 , Jelle Piepenbrock1,2 , and Bartosz Piotrowski1,3
                                    1
                                      Czech Technical University, Prague
                             2
                                 Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands
                                      3
                                        University of Warsaw, Poland


Introduction In satisfiability modulo theories (SMT), quantifiers are treated opaquely: they
are seen as sources of possible instantiations. A quantified sub-formula ∀~xφ is abstracted as a
Boolean variable Q and instantiations are registered in the form of implications Q ⇒ φ[~x 7→ ~t ]
for some ground terms ~t. Consider the following toy formula:

                                 f (3) < 0 ∧ ((∀xf (x) > 0) ∨ (∀xf (x) > x)),

   where f : int → int. To obtain a refutation, we abstract and instantiate as follows:

                          abstraction:        Q1 ≡ (∀xf (x) > 0), Q2 ≡ (∀xf (x) > x)
                  abstracted formula:         f (3) < 0 ∧ (Q1 ∨ Q2 )
                      instantiation 1:        Q1 ⇒ f (3) > 0
                      instantiation 2:        Q2 ⇒ f (3) > 3

    Most approaches instantiate quantifiers gradually, meaning, the new instantiations are added
after testing that the old ones do not already yield a contradiction in the ground solver. In this
work, we propose to use machine learning to decide which quantifiers should be instantiated
during solving. Figure 1 schematically illustrates the considered setup.

                    SMT                                            ML
                    solver                  Instantiation         advice
           Input                                                                    satisfiable
                            Ground
          formula                                            Instances
                          assignment                                                 unsatisfiable
                                           Ground solver                        or infinite loop

    Figure 1: Schematic of the SMT solver with ML guidance for quantifier instantiation.

    There are a number of methods for devising new instantiations [2, 3]. Here we consider a
simple setup where instantiation terms are taken from the set of terms present in the current
ground formula—this includes the instantiations already performed and therefore this set grows
throughout the life of the solver. Without theories, the set of candidate ground terms grows
towards the Herbrand universe. This approach is referred to as enumerative instantiation [8, 5].
    In standard setting, the SMT solver would instantiate all quantifiers that are true in the
current ground model. Here, we propose to instantiate only a subset, based on a pre-trained
ML-predictor. Selecting the right quantifier for instantiation puts less burden on the ground
solver but also facilitates the search for the right ground terms to be used for instantiations.


  ∗ The results were supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports within the dedicated program

ERC CZ under the project POSTMAN no. LL1902.
                                                                                                          Page 73

Selecting Quantifiers for Instantiation                                 Janota, Piepenbrock, Piotrowski


Approach Consider quantified sub-formulas Q1 , . . . , Qn true in the current model of the
ground solver. Consider some pre-trained ML-predictor V from formulas to the interval [0, 1],
where V(Q) = 1 means that the predictor believes that Q is important for the solution of the
whole SMT problem. A straightforward approach would be to instantiate Q with the probability
V (Q). This brings about the risk of instantiating too seldom if the ML predictor has low overall
confidence. Therefore, we rescale to max V(Qi ), i.e., the quantifier argmaxi V(Qi ) is instantiated
with probability 1. But even with this policy, we are running the risk that a bad judgment of
the ML prediction will cause some important quantifiers never to be instantiated. To that end,
with probability  ∈ [0, 1] a quantifier is always instantiated. In essence, this corresponds to
the well-known -greedy policy [9] and a quantifier Q is instantiated with probability:

                                                          V(Q)
                                           + (1 − )               .
                                                        maxi V(Qi )

Implementation and experiments The approach was implemented in the SMT-solver
cvc5 [1] with LightGBM [6] as the ML-predictor. Currently, the ML-predictor only gets as
features the bag of words representation of the quantified sub-formula, i.e., ignoring the overall
context. For evaluation we use SMT-LIB problems from the UFLIA/sledgehammer category,
while filtering out problems solvable without instantiation. Looping-style evaluation is run
(similar to [4, 7, 10]). In the first iteration, an unguided SMT-solver is run on the benchmark
and data extracted from the solved problems is used to train the ML model. Then, the model
is used to guide the solver in the next iteration of solving the benchmark. The success rate is
recorded and examples extracted from the newly solved problems are added to the training set.
This solving-training procedure is repeated 6 times with time limit 60 s for the solver. Figure 2
shows results for  ∈ {0, 0.1, 0.5} and a version with no ML-guidance.




Figure 2: Looping evaluation on UFLIA/sledgehammer dataset. Left: number of training
problems solved cumulatively. Right: number of testing problems solved in individual iterations.



Conclusions and future work The paper shows that that ML guidance can effectively
guide quantifier instantiation in SMT. The evaluation points to a significant impact of learning
on the number of solved instances but we only observe improvements on the training set,
not on testing. This suggests that there is some version of over-fitting, even though not in
the standard sense because the training examples constantly change. We plan to improve
featurization by including the context of quantifiers (looking at the whole SMT problem) and
using more advanced featurization approaches such as graph neural networks.

2
                                                                                                          Page 74

Selecting Quantifiers for Instantiation                                 Janota, Piepenbrock, Piotrowski


References
 [1] Haniel Barbosa, Clark W. Barrett, Martin Brain, Gereon Kremer, Hanna Lachnitt, Makai Mann,
     Abdalrhman Mohamed, Mudathir Mohamed, Aina Niemetz, Andres Nötzli, Alex Ozdemir, Math-
     ias Preiner, Andrew Reynolds, Ying Sheng, Cesare Tinelli, and Yoni Zohar. cvc5: A versatile and
     industrial-strength SMT solver. In Dana Fisman and Grigore Rosu, editors, Tools and Algorithms
     for the Construction and Analysis of Systems - 28th International Conference, TACAS 2022, Held
     as Part of the European Joint Conferences on Theory and Practice of Software, ETAPS, volume
     13243 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 415–442. Springer, 2022.
 [2] David Detlefs, Greg Nelson, and James B. Saxe. Simplify: A theorem prover for program checking.
     J. ACM, 52(3):365–473, 2005.
 [3] Yeting Ge and Leonardo Mendonça de Moura. Complete instantiation for quantified formulas
     in satisfiability modulo theories. In Computer Aided Verification, 21st International Conference,
     CAV, pages 306–320, 2009.
 [4] Mikoláš Janota, Jelle Piepenbrock, and Bartosz Piotrowski. Towards learning quantifier instanti-
     ation in SMT. In Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing – SAT 2022. LIPIcs, 2022.
 [5] Mikoláš Janota, Haniel Barbosa, Pascal Fontaine, and Andrew Reynolds. Fair and adventurous
     enumeration of quantifier instantiations. In Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design, 2021.
 [6] Guolin Ke, Qi Meng, Thomas Finley, Taifeng Wang, Wei Chen, Weidong Ma, Qiwei Ye, and
     Tie-Yan Liu. Lightgbm: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision tree. In I. Guyon, U. V.
     Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances
     in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
 [7] Bartosz Piotrowski and Josef Urban. ATPboost: Learning premise selection in binary setting with
     ATP feedback. In Didier Galmiche, Stephan Schulz, and Roberto Sebastiani, editors, Automated
     Reasoning - 9th International Joint Conference, IJCAR 2018, Held as Part of the Federated Logic
     Conference, FloC 2018, Oxford, UK, July 14-17, 2018, Proceedings, volume 10900 of Lecture Notes
     in Computer Science, pages 566–574. Springer, 2018.
 [8] Andrew Reynolds, Haniel Barbosa, and Pascal Fontaine. Revisiting enumerative instantiation. In
     Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems, volume 10806, pages 112–131,
     2018.
 [9] Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning. Adaptive Computation and
     Machine Learning series. Bradford Books, Cambridge, MA, 2 edition, November 2018.
[10] Josef Urban, Geoff Sutcliffe, Petr Pudlák, and Jirı́ Vyskocil. MaLARea SG1 – machine learner for
     automated reasoning with semantic guidance. In Alessandro Armando, Peter Baumgartner, and
     Gilles Dowek, editors, Automated Reasoning, 4th International Joint Conference, IJCAR 2008,
     Sydney, Australia, August 12-15, 2008, Proceedings, volume 5195 of Lecture Notes in Computer
     Science, pages 441–456. Springer, 2008.




                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                   Page 75




                  Learning plausible and useful conjectures
                            Albert Q. Jiang, Wenda Li, and Mateja Jamnik
                                           University of Cambridge
                                      {qj213, wl302, mj201}@cam.ac.uk

                                                          Abstract
             Conjecturing is an important activity in mathematics. In this paper, we look at the
         why and the how of using machine learning to generate mathematical conjectures. We
         argue that (1) conjecturing is beneficial, both practically and theoretically; (2) conjecture
         learning should make use of available premises and goals in theorems. We also deliver some
         design considerations for building an automated conjecturer.

1        Conjecturing as an essential mathematical activity
Consider lemma construction in theorem proving: in the course of proving a theorem, one
might realise that a particular conjecture, if true, makes it easier to prove the original theorem.
Once the conjecture is proved, it becomes a lemma. A well-known example of this is the
proof of the Taniyama–Shimura–Weil conjecture, which implied Fermat’s last theorem [Wil95].
                                                     Mathematical discovery is interleaved with
                                                     finding interesting conjectures, and proving,
                 Γ
                                                     refuting, or revising them [Lak15].
                           ...    Sub-problem 1
                                                                   From a computational perspective, formal
                     ...
    Original                                      Γ, A ⊢ Λ Γ ⊢ A   theorem proving can be viewed as a search
     search        Γ, A                   Cut
                                                        Γ⊢Λ        problem of finding the goal Λ given the
    problem
                           ...
                                  Sub- problem 2
                                                                   premise Γ, as illustrated in Figure 1. A con-
                     ...                                           jecture is then analogous to an intermediate
                    Λ                                              goal (a “cut”). Cuts reduce the search space
                                                                   size exponentially w.r.t. their depth and
                                                                   therefore simplify the search [Boo84, CS97].
Figure 1: Theorem proving as search. The cut Conjecture/lemma construction has received
transforms the original search problem into two relatively little attention from the AI com-
sub-problems by creating intermediate goal A. munity, considering its essential role in math-
                                                     ematics (see Appendix for a review). This is
partially due to the difficulty of conjuring them: the space of possible conjectures is infinite.
If we limit their size, the space is still combinatorially large and a universal heuristic for good
conjectures is hard to find. Language models [BHA+ 21] sample from combinatorial spaces and
have shown promising reasoning capabilities like solving maths competition problems [PHZ+ 22].
They can be easily configured to learn a general heuristic from human data. They are also not
restricted to generating conjectures syntactically close to the premises or the goals. Thus, they
complement symbolic reasoners, and are an obvious candidate for the task of conjecturing.

2        A quantitative metric for conjecturers
Before embarking on the specifics of a conjecturer, a metric for measuring the quality of con-
jectures is needed. We can examine conjectures qualitatively but that can be costly, hence not
suited to large-scale experiments. For a quantitative metric, we should consider that ineffective
conjectures can be true but not easily provable, untrue but not easily refutable, or trivially true
                                                                                                      Page 76

Learning plausible and useful conjectures                                     Jiang, Li, and Jamnik


and useless for our goal. Meanwhile, effective conjectures usually unlock multiple theorems.
In summary, the metric should prefer conjectures that are more provable, useful, and general.
[CBW00] also used these criteria to measure how interesting mathematical discoveries are.
Suppose we have a conjecturer C and a base prover B (which could take the form of Sledgeham-
mer [PB10] or a learning-assisted prover like LISA [JLHW21]). We can use C to propose new
subgoals, and B to close them. The performance of conjecturers is measured by the proportion
of theorems proven this way, subtracting the proportion of theorems proven with B alone. We
can calculate a vector of this value indexed by the choice of B. The vector is then a quantitative
measure of the conjecturer’s performance.
In this paper we argue that given the proposed metric, conjecture learning should make
use of available premises and goals of theorems. Premises constrain the variable space
in ways that are of interest for mathematics (e.g., the premise p is prime limits us to a small
but interesting set of natural numbers). Focusing on these special variable spaces, one is more
likely to make conjectures of relevance to human mathematics. This can increase the generality
of conjectures: conjectures syntactically or semantically related to goals have a better chance
of helping to prove them, instead of being trivially true (e.g., 0 = 0). Conditioning on goals can
improve the utility of conjectures. In the next section we detail some design considerations.

3     Building an automated conjecturer
The data and the environment Plenty of mathematical corpora and interactive environ-
ments are available: lean-gym [PHZ+ 22] for Lean, PISA [JLHW21] for Isabelle, coq-gym [YD19]
for Coq, mlCoP [KUMO18] for Mizar, etc. Inside these proof corpora there are examples of
conjecturing (Isabelle and Mizar have more due to their declarative proof style). Behaviour
cloning can be deployed on these human conjecturing examples to bootstrap the conjecturer.
For each datapoint, we should have the input-output pair to be in the following format: (input)
the premises of the current problem; the goals of the current problem; the proof so far; (output)
the conjecture written by the human.
The training loop Behaviour cloning alone does not guarantee a hugely useful conjec-
turer [LYWP21]. Since the conjecturer is bootstrapped from human conjecture examples, it
is not aware of the ability of the base prover B and might propose conjectures that are too
hard for it (we presume that the base prover B is weaker than a human). To deal with this
problem, we should adapt our system to come up with conjectures that are both useful and
can be proven by B. For a set of problems, run the following procedure until convergence: use
C and B to prove them; for failed proofs, filter out refutable conjectures with counter-example
finding tools like quickcheck and nitpick (filtering out refutable conjectures with Isabelle
tools was experimented by [NP18]); re-run C to refine the goals until they are either proved by
B or a recursion depth limit is reached; collect all successful proofs as the gold-standard data;
fine-tune both the conjecturer and the base prover on the gold-standard data. This procedure
ensures that the conjecturer is not over-ambitious by only including provable conjectures in
the gold-standard data. As the base prover improves via expert iteration [PHZ+ 22], we should
expect the theorems proven and the conjectures created to become more and more advanced.
The network architecture We want to leverage the recent advances in learning-assisted
theorem proving. As language model (LM)-based systems have demonstrated their potentials on
multiple theorem provers [PS20, PHZ+ 22, JLHW21], textual information as input is preferred
for generality. It is clear that the conjecturer C and the base prover B may share many common
capabilities, therefore a network architecture that reflects this can be advantageous.

2
                                                                                                         Page 77

Learning plausible and useful conjectures                                        Jiang, Li, and Jamnik



References
[BHA+ 21] Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney
          von Arx, Michael S. Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, Erik
          Brynjolfsson, Shyamal Buch, Dallas Card, Rodrigo Castellon, Niladri S. Chatterji, Annie S.
          Chen, Kathleen Creel, Jared Quincy Davis, Dorottya Demszky, Chris Donahue, Moussa
          Doumbouya, Esin Durmus, Stefano Ermon, John Etchemendy, Kawin Ethayarajh, Li Fei-
          Fei, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Gale, Lauren Gillespie, Karan Goel, Noah D. Goodman, Shelby
          Grossman, Neel Guha, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Peter Henderson, John Hewitt, Daniel E. Ho,
          Jenny Hong, Kyle Hsu, Jing Huang, Thomas Icard, Saahil Jain, Dan Jurafsky, Pratyusha
          Kalluri, Siddharth Karamcheti, Geoff Keeling, Fereshte Khani, Omar Khattab, Pang Wei
          Koh, Mark S. Krass, Ranjay Krishna, Rohith Kuditipudi, and et al. On the opportunities
          and risks of foundation models. CoRR, abs/2108.07258, 2021.
[Boo84]   George Boolos. Don’t eliminate cut. Journal of Philosophical Logic, pages 373–378, 1984.
[BSŻC93] Rajiv Bagai, Vasant Shanbhogue, JM Żytkow, and Shang-Ching Chou. Automatic theorem
          generation in plane geometry. In International Symposium on Methodologies for Intelligent
          Systems, pages 415–424. Springer, 1993.
[Bun88]   Alan Bundy. The use of explicit plans to guide inductive proofs. In International conference
          on automated deduction, pages 111–120. Springer, 1988.
[CBW99] Simon Colton, Alan Bundy, and Toby Walsh. Automatic concept formation in pure math-
          ematics. In The 16th international joint conference on Artificial Intelligence - IJCAI ’99,
          1999.
[CBW00] Simon Colton, Alan Bundy, and Toby Walsh. On the notion of interestingness in automated
          mathematical discovery. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 53(3):351–375,
          2000.
[CS97]    Alessandra Carbone and S Semmes. Making proofs without modus ponens: An introduc-
          tion to the combinatorics and complexity of cut elimination. Bulletin of the American
          Mathematical Society, 34(2):131–159, 1997.
[DL82]    Randall Davis and Douglas B Lenat. Knowledge-Based Systems in Artificial Intelligence:
          2 Case Studies. McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1982.
[DVB+ 21] Alex Davies, Petar Veličković, Lars Buesing, Sam Blackwell, Daniel Zheng, Nenad Tomašev,
          Richard Tanburn, Peter Battaglia, Charles Blundell, András Juhász, et al. Advancing
          mathematics by guiding human intuition with ai. Nature, 600(7887):70–74, 2021.
[Eps87]   Susan L Epstein. On the discovery of mathematical theorems. In IJCAI, pages 194–197,
          1987.
[Eps88]   Susan L Epstein. Learning and discovery: One system’s search for mathematical knowledge.
          Computational Intelligence, 4(1):42–53, 1988.
[Faj88]   Siemion Fajtlowicz. On conjectures of graffiti. Discret. Math., 72(1-3):113–118, 1988.
[IB96]    Andrew Ireland and Alan Bundy. Productive use of failure in inductive proof. In Automated
          Mathematical Induction, pages 79–111. Springer, 1996.
[JLHW21] Albert Qiaochu Jiang, Wenda Li, Jesse Michael Han, and Yuhuai Wu. Lisa: Language
          models of isabelle proofs. In Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Artificial Intelligence
          and Theorem Proving, AITP 2021, 5-11 September 2021, Aussois, France, 2021.
[KUMO18] Cezary Kaliszyk, Josef Urban, Henryk Michalewski, and Miroslav Olsák. Reinforcement
          learning of theorem proving. In Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Kristen
          Grauman, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and Roman Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Informa-
          tion Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
          2018, NeurIPS 2018, December 3-8, 2018, Montréal, Canada, pages 8836–8847, 2018.
[Lak15]   Imre Lakatos. Proofs and refutations: The logic of mathematical discovery. Cambridge
          university press, 2015.

                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                        Page 78

Learning plausible and useful conjectures                                       Jiang, Li, and Jamnik


[Len76]   Douglas Bruce Lenat. AM: an artificial intelligence approach to discovery in mathematics
          as heuristic search. Stanford University, 1976.
[LYWP21] Wenda Li, Lei Yu, Yuhuai Wu, and Lawrence C. Paulson. Isarstep: a benchmark for high-
          level mathematical reasoning. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations,
          ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021.
[NP18]    Yutaka Nagashima and Julian Parsert. Goal-oriented conjecturing for isabelle/hol. CoRR,
          abs/1806.04774, 2018.
[NPW02] Tobias Nipkow, Lawrence C. Paulson, and Markus Wenzel. Isabelle/HOL - A Proof Assis-
          tant for Higher-Order Logic, volume 2283 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer,
          2002.
[PB10]    Lawrence C. Paulson and Jasmin Christian Blanchette. Three years of experience with
          sledgehammer, a practical link between automatic and interactive theorem provers. In
          Geoff Sutcliffe, Stephan Schulz, and Eugenia Ternovska, editors, The 8th International
          Workshop on the Implementation of Logics, IWIL 2010, Yogyakarta, Indonesia, October 9,
          2011, volume 2 of EPiC Series in Computing, pages 1–11. EasyChair, 2010.
[PHZ+ 22] Stanislas Polu, Jesse Michael Han, Kunhao Zheng, Mantas Baksys, Igor Babuschkin,
          and Ilya Sutskever. Formal mathematics statement curriculum learning. arXiv preprint
          arXiv:2202.01344, 2022.
[PS20]    Stanislas Polu and Ilya Sutskever. Generative language modeling for automated theorem
          proving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03393, 2020.
[RGM+ 21] Gal Raayoni, Shahar Gottlieb, Yahel Manor, George Pisha, Yoav Harris, Uri Mendlovic,
          Doron Haviv, Yaron Hadad, and Ido Kaminer. Generating conjectures on fundamental
          constants with the ramanujan machine. Nature, 590(7844):67–73, 2021.
[Rud92]   Piotr Rudnicki. An overview of the mizar project. In Proceedings of the 1992 Workshop on
          Types for Proofs and Programs, pages 311–330, 1992.
      +
[RWC 19] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al.
          Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
[UJ20]    Josef Urban and Jan Jakubův. First neural conjecturing datasets and experiments. In
          International Conference on Intelligent Computer Mathematics, pages 315–323. Springer,
          2020.
[Wan60]   Hao Wang. Toward mechanical mathematics. IBM J. Res. Dev., 4(1):2–22, 1960.
[Wil95]   Andrew Wiles. Modular elliptic curves and fermat’s last theorem. Annals of mathematics,
          141(3):443–551, 1995.
[YD19]    Kaiyu Yang and Jia Deng. Learning to prove theorems via interacting with proof assis-
          tants. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov, editors, Proceedings of the 36th
          International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June 2019, Long Beach,
          California, USA, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 6984–6994.
          PMLR, 2019.




4
                                                                                                       Page 79

Learning plausible and useful conjectures                                      Jiang, Li, and Jamnik



Appendix: a review of mathematical conjecturers
In a 1960 piece, Wang pointed out that making interesting conjectures is less easily mechanisable
than formalising proofs [Wan60]. Indeed, compared with the research on automated theorem
proving, conjecturing has received much less attention. Here we look at some prior works on
mechanising mathematical conjecturing, including both symbolic and learning-based methods.
[Len76, DL82] described the AM program, which can reinvent important concepts in set
theory and number theory, given basic facts such as sets and bags. AM is able to conjec-
ture generalisations of existing concepts, among the discovery of other concepts, based on 242
heuristics. [Eps87, Eps88] detailed the GT program , which does concept forming, conjecture
making, and theorem proving in graph theory. Graphs are very carefully represented such that
efficient automation of these activities can be done. The Graffiti program [Faj88] maked
numerical conjecutres on graph theory. Whenever a conjecture is made, the program tries to
refute them using a database of graphs. Those that were not refuted were left as the final
conjectures. Bagai et. al’s system [BSŻC93] made and proved conjectures in plane geometry
of the form that certain diagrams cannot be constructed. The HR program [CBW99] applied
to many finite algebras, as well as number theory and graph theory. HR used seven production
rules to find new concepts from old ones.
One common feature of these programs is that their domains of applications are relatively nar-
row. This is due to that representations of mathematical concepts are very different across
different domains. It is thus difficult to design a symbolic algorithm to find new concepts that
have a wide range of application areas. The Ramanujan machine [RGM+ 21] conjectures
polynomial continued fractions that equate to fundamental constants, and Davies et. al’s
system [DVB+ 21] hints mathematicians about important relations in knot theory and repre-
sentation theory. Although using learning, their representations are also very hard to extend.
Works that relate the most to our paper are PGT [NP18], proof planners [Bun88] and crit-
ics [IB96]. PGT [NP18] generates conjectures by mutating the goals and uses multiple filters to
make sure that they were useful and not easily refutable. This approach requires the conjecture
to lead directly to the goal (the gap can be closed by fastforce). Proof planners [Bun88] specify
the high-level structure of a proof and proof critics [IB96] try to come up with useful conjectures
from failed proofs. Both utilise the proof premises and goals extensively. These three methods
all have a formal logic backend and thus are potentially very general. But they all require the
conjectures to be similar to the premises or goals of the theorem, while the conjecture that is
half way between them is the most effective at reducing the size of the search space. Proof
planners and critics also need explicit instructions in the meta-logic of the proof assistant and
can be costly to deploy.
A refreshing attempt was Urban and Jakubův’s system [UJ20], where they fed theorems in
Mizar [Rud92] in textual form to a GPT-2 style transformer [RWC+ 19] and directly sampled
new theorem statements from it. However, the sampling was purely unconditional, so the
generated statements could be seen as random extrapolations of other theorems in the latent
space. Unsurprisingly, most generated theorems ended up quite trivial; how they related to
other theorems, if at all, was entirely opaque. The IsarStep dataset [LYWP21] consists of
intermediate conjectures in the Isabelle proof assistant [NPW02], but it suffers from requiring
conjectures to be equivalent to the ground truth, when multiple equally valid proofs may have
non-equivalent conjectures.




                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                    Page 80




   Exploring Representation of Horn Clauses using GNNs
         Chencheng Liang1 , Philipp Rümmer1,2 , and Marc Brockschmidt3
                             1
                              Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
                        2
                         University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany
                       3
                         Microsoft Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom

    Automatic program verification has been used in safety-critical industrial software for
decades. Constrained Horn Clauses (CHCs) [7] as an intermediate verification language is
a standard representation of program verification problems. The program is safe if and only if
the CHCs are satisfied. In practice, it is essential to extract information from program features
(e.g., loops, control flow, or data flow) to guide the CHC solvers. For instance, the authors
of [9] and [4] perform static analysis systematically to extract semantic program features (e.g.,
loop variables) to guide refinement process in the counterexample-guided abstraction refine-
ment (CEGAR) [3] based solver. In recent years, along with breakthrough practices in deep
learning [10, 8, 6, 20], many studies [19, 2, 14, 15, 19] have introduced deep learning methods
to guide program verification and produce promising results. In particular, since graphs can
represent highly structured relations naturally, some closely related fields, such as automatic
reasoning, theorem proving, and SAT solving, begin to use the graph to represent logic formulas
and apply graph neural networks (GNNs) [1] to learn the features to guide the solving process.
Works such as FormulaNet [21], LERNA [13], NeuroSAT [17, 18], [12], and [11] have used this
graph-based framework to improve their results by various learning tasks, e.g., premise selection
and unsat-core prediction. However, to the best of our knowledge, we did not see any study
which encodes CHCs to graph representations and use GNNs to learn the program features.
    We believe GNNs can learn useful program features from graph represented CHCs to guide
CHC solvers. In this work, to evaluate our assumption, we first answer two preliminary ques-
tions: (1) What kind of graph representation is suitable for CHCs? (2) Which kind of GNN is
suitable for learning CHC graph representations?
    To answer the first question, we have designed two graph representations (see Figure 1)
of CHCs. Our constraint graph (CG) representation emphasizes the syntactic information of
CHCs by constructing abstract syntax trees for constraints and building binary connections
for relation symbols and their arguments. Our control- and data-flow hypergraph (CDHG)
emphasizes semantic information of programs by using (ternary) hyperedges to represent the
flow of control and data. To better express control- and data-flow, we construct CDHG from
normalized CHCs. The normalization adding extra clauses to the original CHC but retains
logical meaning.
    For the second question, we introduce a new Relational Hypergraph Neural Network (R-
HyGNN) architecture which is an extension of a message-passing GNN, namely, Relational
Graph Convolutional Networks (R-GCN) [16]. In R-HyGNN, messages exchanged between
nodes are computed from the representations of all nodes connected by typed edges. Then, the
messages from all typed edges are aggregated to update the node representations.
    To evaluate our framework, we introduce five proxy tasks (see Table 1) with increasing
difficulties. Task 1 is a trivial sanity check, evaluating whether models can recover information
from the initial node features. Task 2 evaluates the ability of models to handle counting
problems in the overall graph. Task 3 requires the models to answer basic questions about
the wider graph structure. Task 4 is significantly harder than the previous task, requiring the
model to infer if a program variable is bounded from below or above. Finally, Task 5 is much
harder, as it requires implicitly identifying counter-examples (CEs) traces. Moreover, we hope
                                                                                                       Page 81

Exploring Representation of Horn Clauses using GNNs                 Liang, Rümmer and Brockschmidt




Figure 1: A CHC and the corresponding normalized CHCs are in the left upper corner. The
CDHG constructed from the normalized CHCs is in the left lower corner. The CG for the
CHC is on the right side. The texts on nodes and edges indicate the types of nodes and
edges. To better illustrate the graphs, we add the blue boxes with text on nodes to relate the
corresponding concrete symbol names in CHCs.

  Task description                              CG                           CDHG
  1. If a node is an argument of a          100% (95%)                     99% (73%)
  relation symbol
  2. How many times a relation                  1.0                           4.2
  symbol occurs in all clauses
  3. If a typed node is in a cycle          96% (70%)                      99% (51%)
  4. If a relation symbol argument upper           lower         upper           lower
  has upper and lower bound         91% (80%)      91% (75%)     94% (75%)       94% (68%)
  5. If a clause occurs in some or some            all           some            all
  all minimum CEs                   95% (85%)      84% (53%)     96% (86%)       90% (55%)
Table 1: Description and experimental results for five proxy tasks. Task 2 performs regression
task on nodes and is measured by mean square error, while other tasks perform binary classi-
fication task on nodes and are measured by accuracy. Both the fourth and fifth task consists
of two independent binary classification tasks. The values in parentheses are the ratios of the
dominant labels in the binary data distribution. Note that the label distribution differs for the
two graph representations, as CDHGs are constructed from normalized CHCs.


that learning models on the five representative proxy tasks can reduce the bias from adapting
to a particular application.
    The test data is extracted from 8705 linear and 8425 non-linear Linear Integer Arithmetic
(LIA) problems in CHC-COMP repository (see Table 1 in the competition report [5]). We
divide the extracted dataset to train, valid, and test set by 60%, 20%, and 20%, respectively.
The experimental results on the test set are shown in Table 1. As expected, for both graph
representations, the performance of GNN models decreases along with the increasing difficulty
of the tasks. However, even for the hardest (fifth) task, the accuracy is far higher than predicting
the data distribution (values in the parentheses in Table 1), indicating that the models learn
more than trivial patterns. In particular, we see a slight advantage of using the hypergraph

2
                                                                                                         Page 82

Exploring Representation of Horn Clauses using GNNs                   Liang, Rümmer and Brockschmidt


representation (CDHG) comparing with binary graph representation (CG). We plan to use this
framework to support predicate selection of CEGAR-based program verification.


References
 [1] Peter W. Battaglia, Jessica B. Hamrick, Victor Bapst, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Vinı́cius Flores
     Zambaldi, Mateusz Malinowski, Andrea Tacchetti, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Ryan Faulkner,
     Çaglar Gülçehre, H. Francis Song, Andrew J. Ballard, Justin Gilmer, George E. Dahl, Ashish
     Vaswani, Kelsey R. Allen, Charles Nash, Victoria Langston, Chris Dyer, Nicolas Heess, Daan
     Wierstra, Pushmeet Kohli, Matthew Botvinick, Oriol Vinyals, Yujia Li, and Razvan Pascanu.
     Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks. CoRR, abs/1806.01261, 2018.
 [2] Tal Ben-Nun, Alice Shoshana Jakobovits, and Torsten Hoefler. Neural code comprehension: A
     learnable representation of code semantics. CoRR, abs/1806.07336, 2018.
 [3] Edmund Clarke, Orna Grumberg, Somesh Jha, Yuan Lu, and Helmut Veith. Counterexample-
     guided abstraction refinement. In Computer Aided Verification, pages 154–169, Berlin, Heidelberg,
     2000. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
 [4] Yulia Demyanova, Philipp Rümmer, and Florian Zuleger. Systematic predicate abstraction using
     variable roles. In NASA Formal Methods, pages 265–281, Cham, 2017. Springer International
     Publishing.
 [5] Grigory Fedyukovich and Philipp Rümmer. Competition report: CHC-COMP-21, 2021.
 [6] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
     Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling,
     C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, and K.Q. Weinberger, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems, volume 27. Curran Associates, Inc., 2014.
 [7] Alfred Horn. On sentences which are true of direct unions of algebras. The Journal of Symbolic
     Logic, 16(1):14–21, 1951.
 [8] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. ImageNet classification with deep con-
     volutional neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 25.
     Curran Associates, Inc., 2012.
 [9] Jérôme Leroux, Philipp Rümmer, and Pavle Subotić. Guiding Craig interpolation with domain-
     specific abstractions. Acta Informatica, 53(4):387–424, Jun 2016.
[10] Tomas Mikolov, Martin Karafiát, Lukás Burget, Jan Honza Cernocký, and Sanjeev Khudanpur.
     Recurrent neural network based language model. In INTERSPEECH, 2010.
[11] Miroslav Olsak and Josef Urban Cezary Kaliszyk. Property invariant embedding for automated
     reasoning. arXiv, 2019.
[12] Aditya Paliwal, Sarah M. Loos, Markus N. Rabe, Kshitij Bansal, and Christian Szegedy. Graph
     representations for higher-order logic and theorem proving. CoRR, abs/1905.10006, 2019.
[13] Michael Rawson and Giles Reger. A Neurally-Guided, Parallel Theorem Prover, pages 40–56. 08
     2019.
[14] Cedric Richter, Eyke Hüllermeier, Marie-Christine Jakobs, and Heike Wehrheim. Algorithm selec-
     tion for software validation based on graph kernels. Automated Software Engineering, 27(1):153–
     186, June 2020.
[15] Cedric Richter and Heike Wehrheim. Attend and represent: A novel view on algorithm selection for
     software verification. In 2020 35th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
     Engineering (ASE), pages 1016–1028, 2020.
[16] Michael Schlichtkrull, Thomas N. Kipf, Peter Bloem, Rianne van den Berg, Ivan Titov, and Max
     Welling. Modeling relational data with graph convolutional networks, 2017.
[17] Daniel Selsam and Nikolaj Bjørner. Neurocore: Guiding high-performance SAT solvers with unsat-
     core predictions. CoRR, abs/1903.04671, 2019.

                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                       Page 83

Exploring Representation of Horn Clauses using GNNs                 Liang, Rümmer and Brockschmidt


[18] Daniel Selsam, Matthew Lamm, Benedikt Bünz, Percy Liang, Leonardo de Moura, and David L.
     Dill. Learning a SAT solver from single-bit supervision. CoRR, abs/1802.03685, 2018.
[19] Xujie Si, Aaditya Naik, Hanjun Dai, Mayur Naik, and Le Song. Code2inv: A deep learning frame-
     work for program verification. In Computer Aided Verification: 32nd International Conference,
     CAV 2020, Los Angeles, CA, USA, July 21–24, 2020, Proceedings, Part II, page 151–164, Berlin,
     Heidelberg, 2020. Springer-Verlag.
[20] David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driess-
     che, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander Diele-
     man, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy Lillicrap, Madeleine
     Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the game of Go with
     deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, Jan 2016.
[21] Mingzhe Wang, Yihe Tang, Jian Wang, and Jia Deng. Premise selection for theorem proving by
     deep graph embedding. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30, pages 2786–
     2796. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.




4
                                                                                                       Page 84




Using machine learning to detect non-triviality of knots via
              colorability of knot diagrams
                           Alexei Lisitsa1 and Alexei Vernitski2
                              1
                                  University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
                                     a.lisitsa@liverpool.ac.uk
                                      2
                                         University of Essex, UK
                                           asvern@essex.ac.uk

                                               Abstract
         We apply machine learning to combinatorial knot theory, specifically, we consider a
     classical problem of deciding if a knot diagram represents the trivial knot as a classification
     problem. As a part of this process, we use a reformulation of this problem expressed via
     so-called Fox coloring of knot diagrams or, more generally, coloring knot diagrams with
     elements of algebraic structures called quandles.

Introduction
Knot theory is a branch of mathematics in which being assisted by machine learning feels
especially attractive and promising, since small and numerous illuminating examples and coun-
terexamples can be built successfully; let us discuss recent examples of such studies. In [24]
the authors consider the problem of classification of 5 types of simple knots in the polymers
where polymers are encoded by sequences of monomers, and train feed-forward neural networks
and (with much better results) recurrent neural networks for this classification task. In [15]
encoding of knots by rectangular diagrams was used and bidirectional LSTM networks were
trained to recognize 36 knots types. In [12] reinforcement learning was used to untangle knot
diagrams presented in braid encoding. In [16] and in our ongoing research we used reinforcement
learning (multi-agent Q-learning and deep learning) to untangle braids. In [18] we compared
performance of machine learning in testing realizability of Gauss diagrams with that of humans.
In [4, 5, 6] machine learning is applied to studying various knot invariants.
    A quandle is an algebraic structure whose binary operation is a generalization of the oper-
ation of conjugation in a group; see, for example, [7]. Quandles were introduced in [14, 23] as
a powerful knot invariant. To be precise, the fact whether the arcs of a knot diagram can be
colored by elements a given quandle (with certain conditions satisfied at the crossings) is a knot
invariant. In [11, 10, 9] this approach was combined with automated reasoning and SAT solving
to detect trivial knots and, more generally, to recognize knots; see also [3]. In this study we
use machine learning to recognize colorability of knot diagrams with quandles and, therefore,
to detect non-trivial knots.
    In general, the efficient detection of non-trivial knots remains a challenge. The problem
belongs to a complexity class NP ∩ co-NP [21, 13] and polynomial time algorithms for it are
unknown. Very recently quasi-polynomial time algorithm for unknot detection was proposed in
[22]. The recent work on machine learning applied to unknot detection [24, 15, 12] has shown
encouraging performance of learned classifiers for this algorithmically difficult problem. The
research reported in this paper continues the work in this direction and has the following novel
features. We use the most traditional encoding of knots by realiziable Gauss codes/diagrams
[1] and by more recent petal diagrams [2]. We apply classical machine learning algorithms,
such as multilayered perceptrons/feed-forward neural networks. We use approximations of
unknotedness by quandle colorability.
                                                                                                                 Page 85

The Class File                                                                     A. Lisitsa and A. Vernitski


Methodology and details of implementation
In our experiments in this study we used two approaches to representing knot diagrams in
the computer. In one approach, we used classical Gauss codes/diagrams [1]. To produce a
dataset, a pre-defined amount of random Gauss diagrams1 is generated using our tool [17],
then diagrams are checked for realisability using the algorithm for signed realiziability from
[20], and then, the variants are produced by varying at each crossing, which arc goes above
or below the crossing. In another approach, we used petal diagrams of knots [8, 2], and to
produce a dataset, we chose random permutations indicating in which order arcs pass behind
each other at the crossing. Whereas standard permutation matrices were successful, we were
more successful when we represented permutations by new ternary matrices, inspired by an
encoding of permutations as a certain list of numbers called the Lehmer code or the inversion
table [19]. Namely, we represent a permutation p by a matrix in which the entry at i, j is equal
to 1 (or −1, or 0) if p does not swap the order of i and j (if p swaps the order of i and j, if i = j).
The second step in creating the training set and the test set was finding out, for these randomly
generated knot diagrams, whether they represent the trivial knot or a non-trivial knot. In this
study, instead of attempting to untangle the knot, we replace this question by the question
of colorability by certain quandles. At this step, we used two approaches. One approach was
coloring by quandles of small sizes. Another approach was coloring by quandles induced by
cyclic groups, which is equivalent to finding the number called the determinant of the knot
diagram. Why do we consider the question of quandle colorability instead of the question of
being the trivial knot? There are several reasons for this. Firstly, quandle colorability is an
interesting research area in its own right [11, 10, 9, 3]. Secondly, it is known that for small
sizes of diagrams, a diagram represents the trivial knot if and only if it cannot be colored by
one of several small quandles [11, 3] or has a particular value of the determinant. Thirdly, even
for larger diagrams, colorability by quandles of small size is a good approximation to being a
non-trivial knot.

Experiment results
Table 1 presents some of the results of ongoing work in the first approach. G and EG in the
names of datasets are referring to Gauss and Extended Gauss notation, respectively, in a sense
of [1]; SQ-N is referring to the the initial segment of N quandles from a sequence SC of all
simple quandles of small size used in [10]. #Frames are referring to the number of different
unsigned diagrams used in the generation of datasets of signed diagrams.

              Dataset        Size of dataset   Size of diagrams   #Frames   Quandle set   Accuracy
            1-SQ-EG-8all          3072                 8             6        SQ-1         75.3%
            2-SQ-EG-8all          3072                 8             6        SQ-2         65.2%
            5-SQ-EG-8all          3072                 8             6        SQ-5         62.3%
            25-SQ-EG-8all         3072                 8             6        SQ-25        55.2%
            3Q-11-G-1x1024        2048                 11            1        SQ-1         86.5%
            3Q-11-G-4x250         2000                 11            4        SQ-1         65.3%
            3Q-11-G-20x200        8000                 11           20        SQ-1         59.2%

Table 1: The accuracy of MLP (Multi-Layered Perceptron) of recognition of colorability of knot diagrams by
sets of quandles (by any in a set); diagrams are encoded by “one hot” encoding from [18]; 70% training/30%
testing split; WEKA Workbench [25] is used with default settings for MLP


    Our initial results shows that the classical machine learning model of perceptron demon-
    1 random permutations and encoding of diagrams by permutations[17] are used here



2
                                                                                                               Page 86

The Class File                                                                   A. Lisitsa and A. Vernitski


strates good performance for the recognition of quandle colorability of knot diagrams, especially
for the cases of colorability by a single quandle (SQ-1 set consists of single 3-element quandle)
and for the datasets with small number of frames. Increasing the number of quandles and the
number of frames leads to some degradation of the accuracy of learned models.
    In the second approach we considered petal diagrams2 of size 7 (there are 7! = 5040 petal
diagrams of this size, in total) and trained a binary classifier to distinguish between the trivial
knot and non-trivial knots. We used the training set consisting of an equal number (500+500 =
1000) of petal diagrams whose determinant is 1 (they represent the trivial knot) and petal
diagrams whose determinant is not 1 (they represent non-trivial knots 31 , 41 , 51 , or 52 [2]). If
permutations are presented by their permutation matrices, some learning occurs successfully,
with the accuracy on the training set 100% and the accuracy on the test set around 80%. We
also introduced a new way of presenting permutations by ternary matrices (see the definition
above), instead of permutation matrices, and the accuracy on the test set increased to around
96%. For these experiments, we use Keras and TensorFlow in Python, and the binary classifier
is a feed-forward neural network with one hidden layer of size 100, with an input layer of size
7 × 7 = 49 and a softmax output layer. Our results for this approach indicate that indeed
the recognition of diagrams with determinant 1 is learnable and the accuracy is dramataically
increased by using novel encoding by ternary matrices.


References
 [1] Gauss notation. https://knotinfo.math.indiana.edu/descriptions/gauss_notation.html.
     Accessed: 2022-05-10.
 [2] Colin Adams, Thomas Crawford, Benjamin DeMeo, Michael Landry, Alex Tong Lin, MurphyKate
     Montee, Seojung Park, Saraswathi Venkatesh, and Farrah Yhee. Knot projections with a single
     multi-crossing. Journal of Knot Theory and Its Ramifications, 24(03):1550011, 2015.
 [3] W Edwin Clark, Mohamed Elhamdadi, Masahico Saito, and Timothy Yeatman. Quandle colorings
     of knots and applications. Journal of knot theory and its ramifications, 23(06):1450035, 2014.
 [4] Jessica Craven, Mark Hughes, Vishnu Jejjala, and Arjun Kar. Learning knot invariants across
     dimensions. arXiv:2112.00016, 2021.
 [5] Alex Davies, András Juhász, Marc Lackenby, and Nenad Tomasev. The signature and cusp geom-
     etry of hyperbolic knots. arXiv:2111.15323, 2021.
 [6] Alex Davies, Petar Veličković, Lars Buesing, Sam Blackwell, Daniel Zheng, Nenad Tomašev,
     Richard Tanburn, Peter Battaglia, Charles Blundell, András Juhász, Marc Lackenby, Geordie
     Williamson, Demis Hassabis, and Pushmeet Kohli. Advancing mathematics by guiding human
     intuition with AI. Nature, 600:70–74, 2021.
 [7] Mohamed Elhamdadi and Sam Nelson. Quandles, volume 74. American Mathematical Soc., 2015.
 [8] Chaim Even-Zohar, Joel Hass, Nati Linial, and Tahl Nowik. Invariants of random knots and links.
     Discrete & Computational Geometry, 56(2):274–314, 2016.
 [9] Andrew Fish and Alexei Lisitsa. Detecting unknots via equational reasoning, I: exploration. In
     Stephen M. Watt, James H. Davenport, Alan P. Sexton, Petr Sojka, and Josef Urban, editors,
     Intelligent Computer Mathematics - International Conference, CICM 2014, Coimbra, Portugal,
     July 7-11, 2014. Proceedings, volume 8543 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 76–91.
     Springer, 2014.
[10] Andrew Fish, Alexei Lisitsa, and David Stanovský. A combinatorial approach to knot recognition.
     In Ross Horne, editor, Embracing Global Computing in Emerging Economies - First Workshop,


   2 We are grateful to Chaim Even-Zohar for sharing some of his code with us.



                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                            Page 87

The Class File                                                                A. Lisitsa and A. Vernitski


     EGC 2015, Almaty, Kazakhstan, February 26-28, 2015. Proceedings, volume 514 of Communica-
     tions in Computer and Information Science, pages 64–78. Springer, 2015.
[11] Andrew Fish, Alexei Lisitsa, David Stanovský, and Sarah Swartwood. Efficient knot discrimina-
     tion via quandle coloring with SAT and #-SAT. In Gert-Martin Greuel, Thorsten Koch, Peter
     Paule, and Andrew J. Sommese, editors, Mathematical Software - ICMS 2016 - 5th International
     Conference, Berlin, Germany, July 11-14, 2016, Proceedings, volume 9725 of Lecture Notes in
     Computer Science, pages 51–58. Springer, 2016.
[12] Sergei Gukov, James Halverson, Fabian Ruehle, and Piotr Sulkowski. Learning to unknot.
     arxiv:2010.16263, 2020.
[13] Joel Hass, Jeffrey C. Lagarias, and Nicholas Pippenger. The computational complexity of knot
     and link problems. J. ACM, 46(2):185–211, mar 1999.
[14] D. Joyce. Simple quandles. J. Algebra, 79:307–318, 1982.
[15] L. H. Kauffman, N. E. Russkikh, and I. A. Taimanov. Rectangular knot diagrams classification
     with deep learning. arxiv:2011.03498, 2020.
[16] A. Khan, A. Vernitski, and A. Lisitsa. Untangling braids with multi-agent q-learning. In 2021
     23rd International Symposium on Symbolic and Numeric Algorithms for Scientific Computing
     (SYNASC), pages 135–139, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, dec 2021. IEEE Computer Society.
[17] Abdullah Khan, Alexei Lisitsa, and Alexei Vernitski. Gauss-lintel, an algorithm suite for explor-
     ing chord diagrams. In Fairouz Kamareddine and Claudio Sacerdoti Coen, editors, Intelligent
     Computer Mathematics, pages 197–202, Cham, 2021. Springer International Publishing.
[18] Abdullah Khan, Alexei Lisitsa, and Alexei Vernitski. Training ai to recognize realizable gauss
     diagrams: The same instances confound ai and human mathematicians. In Proceedings of the
     14th International Conference on Agents and Artificial Intelligence - Volume 3: ICAART,, pages
     990–995. INSTICC, SciTePress, 2022.
[19] D.E. Knuth. The Art of Computer Programming: Volume 3: Sorting and Searching. Pearson
     Education, 1998.
[20] Vitaliy Kurlin. Gauss paragraphs of classical links and a characterization of virtual link groups.
     Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 145(1):129–140, 2008.
[21] Marc Lackenby. The efficient certification of knottedness and Thurston norm. arxiv:1604.00290,
     2016.
[22] Marc Lackenby. Unknot recognition in quasi-polynomial time. https://video.ucdavis.edu/
     media/quasipolynomial-unknot/1_w3i5jvqi, 2021. record of the talk, Accessed: 2022-08-18.
[23] S. V. Matveev. Distributive groupoids in knot theory. Math. USSR - Sbornik, 47(1):73–83, 1984.
[24] Olafs Vandans, Kaiyuan Yang, Zhongtao Wu, and Liang Dai. Identifying knot types of polymer
     conformations by machine learning. Phys. Rev. E, 101:022502, Feb 2020.
[25] Ian H. Witten, Eibe Frank, Mark A. Hall, and Christopher J. Pal. The WEKA Workbench. Online
     Appendix for Data Mining, Fourth Edition: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques.
     Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 4th edition, 2016.




4
                                                                                                     Page 88




                         Reinforcement Learning in E
                           Jack McKeown and Geoff Sutcliffe
                           University of Miami, Miami, Florida, U.S.A.
                            jam771@miami.edu, geoff@cs.miami.edu


1    Introduction
Modern saturation based theorem provers such as E [8] and Vampire [5] rely on heuristics
to guide their search. Historically, manually engineered heuristics have been the norm. More
recently, advances in machine learning have inspired attempts to leverage that power for guiding
search. While most efforts have used supervised learning, reinforcement learning (RL) has also
been successfully applied [3, 1, 6]. This work aims to incorporate RL into E in a way that
generalizes the approach taken by E’s --auto mode. In the words of E’s documentation:

        Clause selection is determined by a heuristic evaluation function, which con-
        ceptually sets up a set of priority queues and a weighted round robin scheme
        that determines from which queue the next clause is to be picked.

    The order of each priority queue is dictated by its corresponding Clause Evaluation Function
(CEF). When E is invoked on a problem in --auto mode, E analyzes the problem and selects a
set of CEFs and a weighted round-robin CEF-schedule. The CEF-schedule is used for all given
clause selections throughout the proof attempt. The approach taken in this work is to replace
the CEF-schedule with an external mapping from the state of E to a CEF to use for the next
given clause selection. When this mapping is allowed to be stochastic, it can be thought of as
mapping the state of E to a probability distribution over CEFs.


2    Reinforcement Learning Framing
The policy of an RL agent is a mapping from the state of the RL environment to a categorical
probability distribution over the available actions. When queried with a state, s, the agent
samples an action, a, from the distribution πθ (s), and receives a reward from the environment.
    Previous approaches to RL for ATP have mostly been tableaux-based where the state features
are derived from the tableaux and actions are tableaux extension steps [3]. The latest saturation-
based approaches to RL for ATP essentially represent state as the clauses in the processed set
and represent actions as the potential given clauses from the unprocessed set [1, 6]. These
sets of clauses are encoded via neural networks such as Graph Neural Networks. Rewards are
typically given for completing proofs.
    In this work, reinforcement learning is incorporated into E as follows: E is invoked on a
problem with a fixed set of CEFs. The state of E is sent to the agent each time E needs to select
a given clause. At the time of writing, the policy being used, πθ , is implemented by a shallow
neural network with ReLU activation on the hidden layers and a softmax activation function
on the output layer. The state consists of 4 features: the number of clauses and average clause
weight within the unprocessed and processed sets, but many possible features exist. The agent
responds with one of the CEFs as its action. E chooses a given clause using the corresponding
CEF. If the selection completes a proof then the reward is one, otherwise the reward is zero. The
                                                                                                    Page 89

Reinforcement Learning In E                                                 McKeown and Sutcliffe




                    Figure 1: Experimental Setup and Training Architecture


parameters of the policy are learned via Monte-Carlo policy gradients (aka REINFORCE [9]).
Originally, an epsilon-greedy strategy with Q-learning was considered, but was rejected due to
concerns that the agent would heavily favor one CEF in underexplored regions of state-space.


3     Architecture
The architecture shown in Figure 1 is used to train πθ :

    1. A python script e caller.py repeatedly invokes E on problems from the “bushy” prob-
       lems of the MPTP2078 dataset [2]. This script allows for control of the sampling distri-
       bution over problems and can be used to focus training on easy or hard problems.
    2. A python script gain xp.py receives states and rewards from E and sends actions to E.
       It chooses actions via a saved policy and saves completed proof attempts to disk. All
       communication between E and gain xp.py is performed using named pipes.
    3. A python script train policy.py continually updates the policy used by gain xp.py
       using the saved proof attempts.

Multiple instances of e caller and gain xp are run in parallel to speed up learning.


4     Initial Results
For the results shown in Table 1, a constant list of 75 CEFs was extracted from the CEF-
schedules employed by E’s --auto mode. e caller.py was configured to try all MPTP2078
bushy problems, and E is invoked with a timeout of 20 seconds. To see if any learning occurs, a
uniform distribution over the 75 CEFs (ignoring state) is used as a baseline policy. The simplest
extension of this policy is to learn constant probabilities with which to choose each CEF (still
ignoring state). Next, a simple neural network that takes state into account is considered.
Finally, these policies are compared to E’s --auto mode.

                               Approach                    Solved
                               Uniform Distribution          1105
                               Learned Distribution          1105
                               Simple Neural Network         1110
                               E –auto                       1156


        Table 1: Number of MPTP2078 Bushy Problems solved by different approaches


2
                                                                                                            Page 90

Reinforcement Learning In E                                                        McKeown and Sutcliffe


5     Concerns and Future Work
There are various reasons why E’s auto mode still has an advantage over the approaches pre-
sented here. The most apparent reasons are that E’s auto mode has a much richer space of
features, and that the neural network used in these experiments is very simple. A more in-
sidious reason is that the CEF-schedules used in E’s --auto mode were explicitly evolved to
solve more problems, whereas the policy gradient training directly favors finding proofs more
quickly. From an RL perspective, it seems that the goal of quickly solving easy problems may
be in conflict with the goal of solving hard problems. Perhaps oversampling hard problems in
e caller.py could help with this. Alternatively, the policy gradient loss could be scaled by
some notion of problem difficulty. Future work will also explore Actor-Critic [4] models, which
typically outperform REINFORCE.
    It is unclear whether CEF choices are an expressive enough action space for improving
guidance using RL. This work opted for CEFs as actions because it is convenient, and perhaps
more sample efficient, to have a consistent set of available actions. Another reason for using
CEFs is that it side-steps the issue of having to represent clauses as input for neural networks.
(Graph Neural Networks, Recurrent Neural Networks, and Recursive Neural Networks have all
been used with varying degrees of success for this [7].) Despite these theoretical benefits to using
CEFs as actions, with the exponential growth of the unprocessed set during a proof attempt,
the CEFs can only represent a small fraction of the available given clause selections. If the best
clause to select is not preferred by any of the CEFs, then it is impossible to select. One might
also be concerned that 75 CEFs is too many for a first attempt at learning a CEF-schedule. As
a response to this, a smaller list of 7 CEFs was established. These 7 CEFs were chosen to be
very different from one-another in order to retain an expressive choice of action. Despite this,
the results were qualitatively similar to the results in Table 1. The only appreciable difference
was that with 7 CEFs, the models peaked at a much worse performance of around 43% problems
proved.


References
[1] I. Abdelaziz, M. Crouse, et al. Learning to Guide a Saturation-Based Theorem Prover. CoRR,
    abs/2106.03906, 2021.
[2] J. Alama, D. Kühlwein, E. Tsivtsivadze, J. Urban, and T. Heskes. Premise Selection for Mathe-
    matics by Corpus Analysis and Kernel Methods. CoRR, abs/1108.3446, 2011.
[3] C. Kaliszyk, J. Urban, H. Michalewski, and M. Olsák. Reinforcement Learning of Theorem Proving.
    CoRR, abs/1805.07563, 2018.
[4] V. Konda and J. Tsitsiklis. Actor-Critic Algorithms. In S. Solla, T. Leen, and K. Müller, editors,
    Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 12. MIT Press, 1999.
[5] L. Kovacs and A. Voronkov. First-Order Theorem Proving and Vampire. In Proceedings of the
    25th International Conference on Computer Aided Verification, number 8044 in Lecture Notes in
    Artificial Intelligence, pages 1–35. Springer-Verlag, 2013.
[6] G. Reger M. Rawson, A. Bhayat. Reinforced External Guidance for Theorem Provers. 2020.
[7] J. McKeown. Clause Representation for Proof Guidance using Neural Networks, 2021.
[8] S. Schulz, S. Cruanes, and P. Vukmirovic. Faster, Higher, Stronger: E 2.3. In Proceedings of the 27th
    International Conference on Automated Deduction, number 11716 in Lecture Notes in Computer
    Science, pages 495–507. Springer-Verlag, 2019.
[9] R. J. Williams. Simple Statistical Gradient-Following Algorithms for Connectionist Reinforcement
    Learning. Machine Learning, 8:229–256, 2004.


                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                        Page 91




     Evolutionary Computation for Program Synthesis in
                         SuSLik
                                      Yutaka Nagashima1
                     Independent Researcher, Cambridge, the United Kingdom
                                 united.reasoning@gmail.com

                                              Abstract
          A deductive program synthesis tool takes a specification as input and derives a program
      that satisfies the specification. The drawback of this approach is that search spaces for
      such correct programs tend to be enormous, making it difficult to derive correct programs
      within a realistic timeout. To speed up such program derivation, we improve the search
      strategy of a deductive program synthesis tool, SuSLik, using evolutionary computation.
      Our cross-validation shows that the improvement brought by evolutionary computation
      generalises well to unforeseen problems.


1    Deductive Program Synthesis
A far-fetched goal of artificial intelligence (AI) research is to build a system that writes computer
programs for humans. To achieve this goal, researchers take two distinct approaches for program
synthesis: deductive program synthesis and inductive program synthesis.
    Both approaches attempt to produce programs requested by human users. The difference
lies how they produce programs and the guarantee of the resulting programs: deductive syn-
thesis tries to deduce programs that satisfy specifications, while inductive program synthesis
tries to induce programs from examples. A notable example of inductive program synthesis is
the automated spreadsheet data manipulation implemented as an add-in for Microsoft Excel
spreadsheet system [1].
    While such inductive synthesis alleviates the burden of implementation by guessing programs
from given input-output examples, in inductive synthesis the resulting programs are never
trustworthy: there is always a risk that incorrect generalisation results in programs that are
correct for the present examples but not for future cases.
    Deductive synthesis overcomes this limitation with formal specifications: it allows users to
formalise what they want as specifications, whereas inductive synthesis tools guess how pro-
grams should behave from examples provided by users. Thus, in deductive synthesis providing
formal specifications remains as users’ responsibility. The upside of deductive synthesis is,
however, users can obtain correct programs automatically upon success. This correctness as-
surance is particularly useful when it comes to synthesising imperative programs with pointers,
as manually developing heap-manipulating programs is known to be error-prone.
    SuSLik [4], for example, is one of such deductive synthesis tools. It takes a specification
provided by humans and attempts to produce heap-manipulating programs satisfying the spec-
ification in a language that resembles the C language. Internally, this derivation process is
formulated as proof search: SuSLik composes a heap-manipulating program by conducting a
best-first search for a proof goal presented as specification. The drawback is that the search
algorithm often fails to find a proof within a realistic timeout. That is, even we pass a speci-
fication to SuSLik, SuSLik may not produce a program satisfying the specification. According
to Itzhaky et al. [2],
                                                                                                                             Page 92

Genetic Algorithm for Program Syntehsis in SuSLik                                                              Nagashima


     experiment     gen-0    gen-20    gen-40               experiment          gen-0         gen-20         gen-40
       1st (32)      18        16        15                   1st (33)           22             16             16
      2nd (41)       21        21        15                  2nd (24)            17             16             15
      3rd (31)       18        16        15                  3rd (34)            22             18             16
      4th (31)       16        13        13                  4th (34)            24             21             18
    (a) Unsolved problems in the training set           (b) Unsolved problems in the validation set



      different synthesis tasks benefit from different search parameters, and that we might
      need a mechanism to tune SuSLik ’s search strategy for a given synthesis task.




2     Evolutionary Computation for Better Search Strategies
To address this issue, we built an evolutionary
                                                     current generation
framework that improves SuSLik’s synthesis                                                                       training
                                                    champion other winners                losers                 dataset
strategy. Basically, this framework tries to
identify suitable search parameters for SuS-            A
                                                                A
                                                                    B
                                                                     B
                                                                          C      D       E
                                                                                          E
                                                                                                   F
                                                                                                    F
                                                                                                        G
                                                                                                         G
                                                                                                                   H
Lik’s proof search strategy. These parameters
include the weights associated with each step        next generation                                            validation
                                                                 mutated                           mutated       dataset
of search. Our artefact is publicly available       champion
                                                                champion
                                                                                other winners
                                                                                                   winners
at GitHub [3].                                              A   A   A’
                                                        A           A’    A’’    B       CC        B’
                                                                                                   B’   C’C’

    In this framework, we firstly create a pair
of specification sets: one for training and
the other for validation. Secondly, we pro-          Figure 1: Evolution of SuSLik instances
duce the initial population consisting of 40
instances of SuSLik by mutating the original search parameters. In each generation, we assign
the specifications in the training set to each SuSLik instance. Then, we count how many specifi-
cations each SuSLik instance manages to solve within 2.5 seconds. We take 20 best performing
instances and produce new mutants from them. Then, we pass these winners and their mutants
to the next generation and repeat this process 40 times. To accelerate evolution, we allow the
champion of each generation to produce two instances of mutants as shown in Figure 1.
     We experimented our framework four times. Table 1a shows the results of training. For
example, the second row in Table 1a reads as follows: in the first experiment 32 specifications
fell into the set for training, and 18 specifications were left unsolved by the best SuSLik instance
in the zeroth generation. This number decreased to 16 and 15 for the 20th and 40th generation,
respectively.
    In our experiments, we conducted cross-validation for each generation. Their results are
shown in Table 1b. Note that we used a fixed pair of training set and validation set throughout
the evolution of each experiment to maintain the distinction between the two sets. All these
four experiments showed that improvements from training sets translates to improvements on
validation sets despite the small size of dataset. That is, we found that

      there are strategies that tend to perform better for unforeseen problems, and we
      can find such strategies using genetic algorithms.

2
                                                                                                        Page 93

Genetic Algorithm for Program Syntehsis in SuSLik                                         Nagashima


References
[1] Sumit Gulwani. Automating string processing in spreadsheets using input-output examples. In
    Thomas Ball and Mooly Sagiv, editors, Proceedings of the 38th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Sym-
    posium on Principles of Programming Languages, POPL 2011, Austin, TX, USA, January 26-28,
    2011, pages 317–330. ACM, 2011.
[2] Shachar Itzhaky, Hila Peleg, Nadia Polikarpova, Reuben N. S. Rowe, and Ilya Sergey. Deductive
    synthesis of programs with pointers: Techniques, challenges, opportunities - (invited paper). In
    Alexandra Silva and K. Rustan M. Leino, editors, Computer Aided Verification - 33rd International
    Conference, CAV 2021, Virtual Event, July 20-23, 2021, Proceedings, Part I, volume 12759 of
    Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 110–134. Springer, 2021.
[3] Yutaka Nagashima. https://github.com/yutakang/suslik/tree/evolutionary, 2021.
[4] Nadia Polikarpova and Ilya Sergey. Structuring the synthesis of heap-manipulating programs. Proc.
    ACM Program. Lang., 3(POPL):72:1–72:30, 2019.




                                                                                                   3
                                                                                                    Page 94




  Project Proposal: Learning Variable Mappings to Repair
                         Programs
 Pedro Orvalho1∗, Jelle Piepenbrock23 , Mikoláš Janota2 , and Vasco Manquinho1
                               1
                                 INESC-ID, IST - U. Lisboa, Portugal
                      2
                          CIIRC, Czech Technical University in Prague, Czechia
                           3
                             Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands


                                               Abstract
         The increasing demand for programming education has given rise to all kinds of online
     evaluations, such as Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) focused on introductory
     programming assignments (IPAs), especially over the last few years due to the coronavirus
     outbreak. As a consequence of a large number of enrolled students, one of the main
     challenges in these courses is to provide valuable and personalized feedback to students.
     This personalized feedback can be provided as a list of possible repairs to a student’s
     program. Typically semantic program repair tools repair an incorrect program using a
     correct implementation for the same IPA. In order to compare both programs, a relation
     between both programs’ sets of variables is required. Thus, in this work, we propose to
     learn how to map the set of variables between different small imperative programs based
     on both programs’ abstract syntax trees (ASTs) using graph neural networks (GNNs).

Introduction. Program Synthesis, the task to automatically generate programs and math-
ematical objects that satisfy a given high-level specification [3, 12], is a well-studied problem
in Theorem Proving [4, 5], and it has even been considered the Holy Grail of Computer Sci-
ence [6, 9]. Program Repair can be seen as a special case of Program Synthesis, where a given
program has a faulty region that needs to be repaired by synthesizing a correct patch or by
reusing code snippets from other correct programs. Automated program repair [1, 7, 8, 13] has
become crucial to provide feedback to each novice programmer by checking their introductory
programming assignments (IPAs) submissions using a pre-defined test suite. Semantic program
repair frameworks use a correct implementation, provided by the lecturer or submitted by a
previously enrolled student, to repair a new incorrect student’s submission. These tools need to
compare both programs, i.e., the correct and the faulty implementation. In order to compare
both programs, a relation between both programs’ sets of variables is required. For exam-
ple, consider both programs presented in Listings 1, where having a mapping between both
programs’ variables lets us reason about which repairs one should perform to fix the faulty
program. In this position paper, we propose to take advantage of the structural information of
the abstract syntax trees (ASTs) of small imperative programs to learn how to map the set of
variables between a correct program and a faulty one using graph neural networks (GNNs).

IPAs Dataset. We used the C-Pack-IPAs [10] benchmark to evaluate this work. This
benchmark is composed by student programs developed during an introductory programming
course in C language were collected at Instituto Superior Técnico. First, we selected only sub-
missions that compiled without any error and satisfied a set of input-output test cases for each
IPA. Afterwards, we used MultIPAs [11], a program transformation tool that can augment
IPAs benchmarks by performing program mutations and introducing bugs to the programs.
  ∗ This work was done while this author was visiting CIIRC, CTU in Prague.
                                                                                                         Page 95

Learning Variable Mappings to Repair Programs             Orvalho, Piepenbrock, Janota, and Manquinho


Listing 1: Function that finds and returns Listing 2: Function that finds and returns
the maximum number among n1, n2 and n3. the maximum number among x, y and z.


 1   int max(int n1, int n2, int n3)                1int max(int x, int y, int z){
 2   {                                              2  int m = 0;
 3     int m = n1 > n2 ? n1 : n2;                3     m = x > m ? x : m;
 4     return n3 > m ? n3 : m;                   4     m = y > m ? y : m;
 5   }                                           5     return z > m ? z : m;
                                                 6   }
Listings 1: Both functions find and return the maximum number among their parameters’
values. However, the function in Listing 2 is only correct for positive numbers, if we consider
negative numbers the function is incorrect since it assigns the variable m to 0. The mapping
between these programs’ sets of variables is {m : m; n1 : x; n2 : y; n3 : z}.


MultIPAs can perform simple mutations to each program (e.g. swapping comparison opera-
tors, swapping the if’s then-block with the else-block and negating the test condition) to gen-
erate semantically equivalent programs with the same variables. Hence, we gathered a dataset
of programs and the mappings between their sets of variables. For example, we have 94 correct
submissions for the first IPA. By just swapping comparison operators (e.g. ≥, ≤, ==, 6=), we
are able to compute a dataset of 27261 pairs of programs and the mappings between their sets
of variables. We plan to perform more complex mutations to the set of IPAs.

Program Representations. We represent programs based on their abstract syntax trees
(ASTs). An AST is described by a set of nodes that correspond to non-terminal symbols in
the programming language’s grammar and a set of tokens that correspond to terminal symbols.
Then, we create a unique node in the graph for each distinct variable in the program and connect
all the variable occurrences in the program to the same unique node. Regarding the edges of the
program representation, we consider two types of edges in our representation: child and sibling
edges. Child edges correspond to the typical edges in the AST representation that connect each
parent node to its children. Child edges are bidirectional. Sibling edges connect each child to
its sibling successor. These edges denote the order of the arguments for a given node [2]. Sibling
edges allow the program representation to differentiate between different arguments when the
order of the arguments is important (e.g. binary operation such as ≤). For example, consider
the node that corresponds to the operation σ(A1 , A2 , . . . , Am ). The parent node σ is connected
to each one of its children by a child edge e.g. σ ↔ A1 , σ ↔ A2 , . . . , σ ↔ Am . Additionally, each
child its connected to its successor by a sibling edge e.g. A1 → A2 , A2 → A3 , . . . , Am−1 → Am .
The interested reader is referred to appendix A for a graphical representation of a small example.

GNNs. Graph Neural Networks are a subclass of neural networks designed to operate on
graph-structured data, which may be citation networks, first-order logic or representations of
computer code. Here, we use a pair of ASTs, representing two programs for which we want to
match variables, as the input. The main operative mechanism is to perform message passing
between the nodes, so that information about the global problem can be passed between the
local constituents. The content of these messages and the final representation of the nodes
is parameterized by neural network operations (matrix multiplications composed with a non-
linear function). For the variable matching task, we do the following to train the parameters of
the network. After several message passing rounds, through the edges defined by the program

2
                                                                                                   Page 96

Learning Variable Mappings to Repair Programs        Orvalho, Piepenbrock, Janota, and Manquinho


representations above, we obtain numerical vectors corresponding to each variable node in the
two programs. We compute scalar products between each possible combination of variable nodes
in the two programs, followed by a softmax function. As the correct mapping of variables is
known because the samples are obtained by program mutation, we can compute a cross-entropy
loss and minimize it so that the network output corresponds to the labeled variable matching.

Acknowledgments. This research was supported by Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia
(FCT) through grant SFRH/BD/07724/2020, and projects UIDB/50021/2020, PTDC/CCI-
COM/32378/2017; by European funds through COST Action CA2011; and by the Ministry of
Education, Youth and Sports within the program ERC CZ under the project POSTMAN no.
LL1902.


References
 [1] Umair Z. Ahmed, Zhiyu Fan, Jooyong Yi, Omar I. Al-Bataineh, and Abhik Roychoudhury.
     “Verifix: Verified Repair of Programming Assignments”. In: ACM Trans. Softw. Eng.
     Methodol. (2022). issn: 1049-331X. doi: 10.1145/3510418. url: https://doi.org/10.
     1145/3510418.
 [2] Miltiadis Allamanis, Marc Brockschmidt, and Mahmoud Khademi. “Learning to Repre-
     sent Programs with Graphs”. In: 6th International Conference on Learning Representa-
     tions, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018, Conference Track
     Proceedings. 2018.
 [3] Matej Balog, Alexander L. Gaunt, Marc Brockschmidt, Sebastian Nowozin, and Daniel
     Tarlow. “DeepCoder: Learning to Write Programs”. In: 5th International Conference on
     Learning Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference
     Track Proceedings. 2017.
 [4] Chad E. Brown and Thibault Gauthier. “Self-Learned Formula Synthesis in Set Theory”.
     In: CoRR abs/1912.01525 (2019).
 [5] Thibault Gauthier. “Synthesis of Recursive Functions from Sequences of Natural Num-
     bers1”. In: 6th Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Theorem Proving, AITP (2021).
 [6] Sumit Gulwani, Oleksandr Polozov, and Rishabh Singh. “Program Synthesis”. In: Foun-
     dations and Trends in Programming Languages 4.1-2 (2017), pp. 1–119.
 [7] Sumit Gulwani, Ivan Radicek, and Florian Zuleger. “Automated clustering and program
     repair for introductory programming assignments”. In: PLDI 2018. ACM, 2018, pp. 465–
     480.
 [8] Rahul Gupta, Soham Pal, Aditya Kanade, and Shirish K. Shevade. “DeepFix: Fixing
     Common C Language Errors by Deep Learning”. In: AAAI 2017. Ed. by Satinder P.
     Singh and Shaul Markovitch. AAAI Press, 2017, pp. 1345–1351.
 [9] A Solar Lezama. “Program synthesis by sketching”. PhD thesis. UC Berkeley, 2008.
[10]   Pedro Orvalho, Mikoláš Janota, and Vasco Manquinho. C-Pack of IPAs: A C90 Program
       Benchmark of Introductory Programming Assignments. 2022. doi: 10 . 48550 / arXiv .
       2206.08768. url: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2206.08768.




                                                                                              3
                                                                                                    Page 97

Learning Variable Mappings to Repair Programs         Orvalho, Piepenbrock, Janota, and Manquinho


[11]   Pedro Orvalho, Mikoláš Janota, and Vasco Manquinho. “MultIPAs: Applying Program
       Transformations to Introductory Programming Assignments for Data Augmentation”. In:
       ESEC/FSE ’22: 30th ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Sym-
       posium on the Foundations of Software Engineering, Singapore, November 14-18, 2022.
       ACM, 2022. doi: 10 . 1145 / 3540250 . 3558931. url: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 /
       3540250.3558931.
[12]   Pedro Orvalho, Miguel Terra-Neves, Miguel Ventura, Ruben Martins, and Vasco M. Man-
       quinho. “Encodings for Enumeration-Based Program Synthesis”. In: Principles and Prac-
       tice of Constraint Programming - 25th International Conference, CP 2019, Stamford, CT,
       USA, September 30 - October 4, 2019, Proceedings. 2019, pp. 583–599.
[13]   Michihiro Yasunaga and Percy Liang. “Graph-based, Self-Supervised Program Repair
       from Diagnostic Feedback”. In: ICML 2020. Vol. 119. Proceedings of Machine Learning
       Research. PMLR, 2020, pp. 10799–10808.




4
                                                                                                      Page 98

Learning Variable Mappings to Repair Programs           Orvalho, Piepenbrock, Janota, and Manquinho


A        Appendix

                                                                 block

Listing 3: Small example of a C code block
with an expression that uses int variables a
and b, previously declared in the program.                       assign


 1   {
 2       // a and b are ints
                                                      ID     a            expr
 3       a = a - b;
 4   }


                                                      ID     a                op   -   ID   b

                                                  (a) Part of the AST representation of Listing 3.




                                     block




                                    assign




                            ID                        expr




                                             ID        -                  ID




                            a                                             b


(b) Our program representation for the program presented in Listing 3. We add additional variable
nodes (green nodes), new sibiling edges (red dashed edges) and we also make the AST edges (black
edges) bidirectional.

Figure 1: AST and our program representation for the small code snippet presented in Listing 3.


                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                         Page 99




Synthetic Proof Term Data Augmentation for Theorem Proving
                   with Language Models
                    Joseph Palermo1 , Johnny Ye1 , and Jesse Michael Han2
                                             1
                                               Cash App Labs
                                       2
                                           University of Pittsburgh∗



Introduction
Imitation learning for the task of theorem proving is bottlenecked by the limited size of existing libraries
of formalized mathematics (e.g. mathlib [1]). Prior work utilizing language models for theorem proving
indicates that training data limitations are causing performance saturation [2, 3]. Prior work has
also demonstrated the utility of synthetic data for improving language models [4, 5, 6, 7] and for
learning theorem proving [8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. We propose using samples from trained language models
in conjunction with the Lean kernel [13] to generate novel training examples. In particular, we train
language models to generate Lean proof terms unconditioned by any theorem statement and we sample
from these models to generate collections of proof term candidates. We then apply the Lean kernel
to identify type-correct proof term candidates and infer corresponding types. From this synthetic
data we construct training examples for proof term language modelling. Augmenting training sets by
adding synthetic examples is shown to improve the performance of proof term language modeling on
a held-out test set.

Bootstrap Datasets
In order to use trained language models to generate new candidate training examples, we first create a
“bootstrap” dataset from which a model can be trained. Our examples for unconditioned proof term
language modelling (which we call unconditioned examples) have the form: PROOF <proof> EOT.
They are unconditioned in the sense that they are not conditioned on a theorem statement. We call
the dataset comprising these examples: unconditioned bootstrap. This dataset is used to train the
model that is sampled to produce synthetic examples. It is also used to train a baseline model and to
provide examples for a held-out test set.
    By contrast, our examples for theorem-conditioned proof term language modelling (which we call
conditioned examples) have the form: THEOREM <theorem> PROOF <proof> EOT. We call the
dataset comprising these examples: conditioned bootstrap. This dataset is used only to train a
baseline model and to provide examples for a held-out test set.
    As a data augmentation strategy, we perform tree traversal on each expression in mathlib to
identify unique sub-expressions which are also valid proofs. We convert these filtered sub-expressions
into pretty-printed text format and filter for length less than 2048 characters. We parse and type-
check these proofs to ensure that pretty-printing has not rendered them invalid and to obtain the
corresponding theorem statement.
  ∗ work for this project was completed while at OpenAI




                                                          1
                                                                                                     Page 100


Splitting the Bootstrap Datasets
We split our bootstrap datasets into train, validation and test sets, firstly by splitting on mathlib
declaration names. We also apply a further filter to reduce the maximum similarity of training examples
to validation and test examples. Using TF-IDF [14] embeddings of our examples we remove any
validation or test example (xtest ) for which:

           levenstein distance(xtest , arg maxxtrain cosine similarity(xtest , xtrain ))
                                                                                         < 0.15       (1)
                                          length(xtest )
    The threshold value of 0.15 was determined after we found empirically that it enabled us to overfit
our training data. Our initial split of declaration names produced 207,194 train examples, 55,470
validation examples and 54,964 test examples. After the additional filtering step, 11,145 validation
examples and 10,233 test examples remain.

Creating Synthetic Examples
To generate proof candidates, we sample language models trained on the unconditioned bootstrap
dataset. We parse and type-check proof candidates, and if type-check is successful we serialize the corre-
sponding type. This process produces synthetic training examples of both the conditioned and uncondi-
tioned variety. We also generate an additional example from each proof candidate regardless of whether
or not it has passed type-checking: NON TYPE CHECKED PROOF <non type checked proof> EOT.
These examples are useful in assessing the effect type-check filtering has on data quality.

Bootstrap Training Sets vs. Augmented Training Sets
For these experiments, we train language models using Fairseq [15]. We utilize Fairseq’s implementation
of GPT-2 [16] with approximately 2 billion parameters (the so-called “big” size). We also utilize
Fairseq’s implementation of the “gpt2” byte pair encoder. We set max-tokens to 1536, use SGD with
a fixed learning rate of 0.01, set early-stopping patience to 100 epochs, and set dropout to 0.1.
    After training a model on the unconditioned bootstrap dataset, we use the trained model to sample
20 million proof candidates using beam search. We set the beam search temperature to 1.3 and beam
width to 5. From the set of candidates, 1.57 % or 352,469 unique proofs passed type-check.
    We create augmented datasets by randomly sampling synthetic examples without replacement and
adding them to the bootstrap datasets. Samples are added until the augmented dataset in question is
100% larger than the corresponding bootstrap dataset as measured by the number of examples in the
conditioned case and by the number of characters in the unconditioned case. We weight the additional
unconditioned examples by counting characters because the synthetic unconditioned examples can
include both type-checked and non-type-checked proofs, and the average length of non-type-checked
proofs tends to be longer (162 characters vs 275 characters on average).
    We create 4 distinct augmented datasets by utilizing different combinations of synthetic examples:

   • conditioned augmented: conditioned bootstrap +100% synthetic conditioned (weighted by #
     of additional examples)
   • unconditioned augmented (non-type-checked): unconditioned bootstrap +100% synthetic
     unconditioned non-type-checked (weighted by # of additional characters)
   • unconditioned augmented (50/50 type-correct & non-type-checked): unconditioned
     bootstrap +50% synthetic unconditioned non-type-checked and +50% synthetic unconditioned
     type-correct (weighted by # of additional characters)
   • unconditioned augmented (fully type-correct): unconditioned bootstrap +100% synthetic
     unconditioned type-correct (weighted by # of additional characters)


                                                    2
                                                                                                       Page 101


    We use each of the 2 bootstrap and the 4 augmented datasets to train language models. Then we
evaluate each of these 6 models on our held-out bootstrap test sets, matching models trained on con-
ditioned or unconditioned examples to the conditioned or unconditioned test sets respectively. When
evaluating models trained on conditioned examples we prompt the models with theorem statements.

  Training Dataset                                             Test Loss   Test Ppl.    Test Accuracy
  conditioned bootstrap                                          1.25        2.38           9.72%
  conditioned augmented                                          1.12        2.18          16.92%
  unconditioned bootstrap                                        1.74        3.35            N/A
  unconditioned augmented (non-type-checked)                     1.72        3.30            N/A
  unconditioned augmented (50/50 type-correct & non-...)         1.71        3.28            N/A
  unconditioned augmented (fully type-correct)                   1.70        3.25            N/A

  Table 1: Test loss, test perplexity, and test accuracy of the models trained on each dataset. Test
  accuracy measures the % of test examples for which the generated proof matches ground truth.

    We find that training on the augmented datasets results in superior metrics on our test sets. In the
unconditioned case we also find that better metrics are achieved by using training sets in which a higher
percentage of the synthetic data is type-correct. This demonstrates the improvement in data quality
afforded by using the Lean kernel as a filter. However, since only a small percentage of synthetic proofs
pass type-check, in practice we can likely expect the best possible unconditioned language modelling
metrics to be achieved by simply training on all generated examples, as such a dataset would be much
larger.

Can Increased Regularization Explain the Performance Boost?
We investigate how much of the improvement in loss associated with training on an augmented dataset
is accounted for by an increase in regularization that can be achieved with dropout. To do this we train
models on the conditioned bootstrap dataset and the conditioned augmented dataset with successively
higher levels of dropout (incrementing by 0.1), until increasing dropout no longer improves the best
achieved validation loss.
    Training Dataset          Metric      Dropout: 0.1   Dropout: 0.2   Dropout: 0.3    Dropout: 0.4
    conditioned bootstrap      Loss           1.25           1.15           1.09            1.09
    conditioned augmented      Loss           1.12           1.04          1.01             1.01
    conditioned bootstrap    Perplexity       2.38           2.21           2.13            2.13
    conditioned augmented    Perplexity       2.18           2.06          2.01             2.02
    conditioned bootstrap    Accuracy        9.72%         11.47%         12.97%           14.2%
    conditioned augmented    Accuracy       16.92%         18.29%         20.82%          19.37%

  Table 2: Test loss, test perplexity, and test accuracy of the models trained on each dataset with
                                           varying dropout.

   We find that optimal test loss is achieved at a dropout value of 0.3. Notably, even with optimized
dropout we observe a significant performance advantage from training on the augmented dataset.

Code. Source code is available at: https://github.com/joepalermo/synthetic-proof-term-data-augmentation

Acknowledgements. The authors would like to thank Jason Rute, Alok Singh, Alex Krizhevsky,
Ragavan Thurairatnam, Hashiam Kadhim, Marc Tyndel, Rayhane Mama, and Louay Hazami for
helpful discussions.



                                                   3
                                                                                               Page 102


References
 [1] T. mathlib Community, “The lean mathematical library,” in Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIG-
     PLAN International Conference on Certified Programs and Proofs, CPP 2020, (New York, NY,
     USA), p. 367–381, Association for Computing Machinery, 2020.

 [2] S. Polu and I. Sutskever, “Generative language modeling for automated theorem proving,” CoRR,
     vol. abs/2009.03393, 2020.
 [3] J. M. Han, J. Rute, Y. Wu, E. W. Ayers, and S. Polu, “Proof artifact co-training for theorem
     proving with language models,” CoRR, vol. abs/2102.06203, 2021.
 [4] A. Anaby-Tavor, B. Carmeli, E. Goldbraich, A. Kantor, G. Kour, S. Shlomov, N. Tepper, and
     N. Zwerdling, “Not enough data? deep learning to the rescue!,” 2019.
 [5] T. Schick and H. Schütze, “Generating datasets with pretrained language models,” 2021.
 [6] V. Kumar, A. Choudhary, and E. Cho, “Data augmentation using pre-trained transformer mod-
     els,” 2020.

 [7] Z. Wang, A. W. Yu, O. Firat, and Y. Cao, “Towards zero-label language learning,” 2021.
 [8] M. Wang and J. Deng, “Learning to prove theorems by learning to generate theorems,” CoRR,
     vol. abs/2002.07019, 2020.
 [9] E. Aygün, Z. Ahmed, A. Anand, V. Firoiu, X. Glorot, L. Orseau, D. Precup, and S. Mourad,
     “Learning to prove from synthetic theorems,” CoRR, vol. abs/2006.11259, 2020.
[10] Y. Wu, A. Jiang, J. Ba, and R. B. Grosse, “INT: an inequality benchmark for evaluating gener-
     alization in theorem proving,” CoRR, vol. abs/2007.02924, 2020.
[11] Y. Wu, M. N. Rabe, W. Li, J. Ba, R. B. Grosse, and C. Szegedy, “LIME: learning inductive bias
     for primitives of mathematical reasoning,” CoRR, vol. abs/2101.06223, 2021.

[12] V. Firoiu, E. Aygün, A. Anand, Z. Ahmed, X. Glorot, L. Orseau, L. Zhang, D. Pre-
     cup, and S. Mourad, “Training a first-order theorem prover from synthetic data,” CoRR,
     vol. abs/2103.03798, 2021.
[13] L. de Moura, S. Kong, J. Avigad, F. van Doorn, and J. von Raumer, “The Lean Theorem Prover
     (System Description),” in Automated Deduction - CADE-25 (A. P. Felty and A. Middeldorp, eds.),
     (Cham), pp. 378–388, Springer International Publishing, 2015.
[14] J. Ramos et al., “Using tf-idf to determine word relevance in document queries,” in Proceedings
     of the first instructional conference on machine learning, vol. 242, pp. 29–48, Citeseer, 2003.
[15] M. Ott, S. Edunov, A. Baevski, A. Fan, S. Gross, N. Ng, D. Grangier, and M. Auli, “fairseq: A
     fast, extensible toolkit for sequence modeling,” CoRR, vol. abs/1904.01038, 2019.
[16] A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, and I. Sutskever, “Language models are
     unsupervised multitask learners,” 2019.




                                                 4
                                                                                                   Page 103




             Learning Instantiation in First-Order Logic
Jelle Piepenbrock1,2 , Josef Urban1 , Konstantin Korovin3 , Miroslav Olšák4 , Tom
                           Heskes2 , and Mikoláš Janota1
                      1
                          CIIRC, Czech Technical University in Prague, Czechia
                           2
                             Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands
                                    3
                                       University of Manchester, UK
                           4
                             Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques, France

      Introduction The appearance of strong CDCL-based propositional (SAT) solvers has
greatly advanced several areas of automated reasoning (AR). One of the directions in AR is thus
to apply SAT solvers to expressive formalisms such as first-order logic, for which large corpora of
general mathematical problems exist today. This is possible due to Herbrand’s theorem, which
allows reduction of first-order problems to propositional problems by instantiating variables.
The core challenge is choosing the right instances from the typically infinite Herbrand universe.
Instantiation is a powerful tool for formal reasoning with quantifiers.
    In this work, we develop the first machine learning system targeting this task, addressing
its combinatorial and invariance properties. In particular, we develop a new GNN2RNN archi-
tecture based on an invariant graph neural network (GNN) that learns from problems and their
solutions independently of symbol names (addressing the abundance of skolems), combined with
a recurrent neural network (RNN) that proposes for each clause its instantiations. The archi-
tecture is then trained on a corpus of mathematical problems and their instances produced by
the iProver system, and its performance is evaluated in several ways. We show that the system
can achieve high accuracy in predicting the right instances, and that it is capable of solving a
large number of problems by educated guessing when combined with a SAT solver.
    The power of instantiation is formalized by Herbrand’s theorem [5], which states, roughly
speaking, that within first-order logic (FOL), quantifiers can always be eliminated by the right
instantiations. Herbrand’s theorem further states that it is sufficient to consider instantia-
tions from the Herbrand universe, which consists of terms with no variables (ground terms)
constructed from the symbols appearing in the problem. This fundamental result has been
explored in automated reasoning (AR) systems since the 1950s [2]. It means that once the right
instantiations are discovered, we end up with a problem without quantifiers, which is typically
easy to solve by state-of-the-art SAT solvers [12].
    Methods Our starting point for instantiation in first-order logic is iProver. At the core
of iProver is the Inst-Gen [4, 9] instantiation calculus, which can be combined with resolution
and superposition calculi [3]. At a high level, the procedure works as follows. Given a set of
first-order clauses S its propositional abstraction S⊥ is obtained by mapping all variables to a
designated ground term ⊥. A propositional solver is applied to S⊥ and it either proves that
S⊥ is unsatisfiable and in this case the set of first-order clauses S is also unsatisfiable or shows
that S⊥ is satisfiable and in this case returns a propositional model of the abstraction S⊥. This
propositional model is analyzed if it can be extended to a full first-order model. If it cannot
be extended then it is possible to show that there must be complementary literals in the model
that are unifiable.
    A major bottleneck is however the large number of generated instances, with only a few
typically needed for the final proof. This motivates our work here: a trained predictor that
proposes the most relevant instantiations can significantly help and complement the complete
search procedures used by systems like iProver.
                                                                                                                                                                          Page 104

Learning Instantiation in First-Order Logic                                                                                                    Jelle Piepenbrock et al.


    We construct a large corpus of instantiations by running iProver on 113 332 first-order ATP
problems created by the AI4REASON project. They originate from the Mizar Mathematical Li-
brary (MML) [8] and are exported to first-order logic by the MPTP system [14]. All these prob-
lems have an ATP proof (in general in a high time limit) found by either the E/ENIGMA [11, 6]
or Vampire/Deepire [10, 13] systems. Additionally, the problems’ premises have been pseudo-
minimized [7] by iterated Vampire runs. We use the pseudo-minimized versions because our
focus here is on guidance rather than on premise selection.
    We reimplement and modify the GNN architecture used in [6] to allow the network to
produce partial instantiations for each clause by using a recurrent neural network (RNN) af-
ter running the GNN. The method computes instantiations level-wise, meaning that one head
symbol is picked for each variable (if needed) in each clause, after which we add fresh variables
and again ask for head symbols (see Figure 1).
                                                                                                                             (1) instantiate x by head symbol t
              ∀ x z P( f( x , z ) )
                         t/2              g/1                                                                                with arity 2 and z by g of arity 1
                             ,       ,                                                                                       (going from level0 to level1 )
    ∀ x1 x2 z1 P ( f ( t( x1   x2 )    g( z1 ) ) )
                      c/0        c/0        e/0                                                                              (2) instantiate x1 , x2 , z1 by
                                                                                                                             constants c, c, and e, respectively
               P ( f ( t( c , c ) , g( e ) ) )
                                                                                                                             (going from level1 to level2 )
Figure 1: Term instantiation through incremental deepening. In the figure, there are two
instantiation steps, one after the other.
    Results We first evaluate the trained GNN2RNN by measuring the overlap of the predicted
instantiations on the unseen test problems at each level. The system manages to predict correct
instantiations for a large part of the set, see Figure 2a. In particular, about for 700 out of 1682
problems, the predictions include the exact instances used in the iProver proof. Figure 2b




                                                                         Fraction instantiations exactly correct
                    700                                                                                            1.0
                    600                                                                                            0.8


    Problem count
                    500
                                                                                                                   0.6
                    400
                    300                                                                                            0.4
                    200                                                                                            0.2
                    100                                                                                            0.0
                      0
                          0.0      0.2      0.4     0.6      0.8   1.0                                                   0        1     2        3       4
                                Fraction of instantiations covered                                                                     Level
                                              (a)                                                                                       (b)
Figure 2: a: Histogram of the fraction of needed instantiations predicted for unseen test set
problems. b: Violin plot of the fraction of instantiations correctly predicted, split by how many
symbol levels from the base problem the problem was. Blue dot is the median of each group.
shows the results per level, which reveals an interesting pattern: the system is much better
at predicting the instances for levels 1–4 (almost fully correct), when the first head symbol of
each term is already determined by the proof instance. Next, we combine GNN2RNN with
EGround and PicoSAT [1] to see if the proposed ground instances are already propositionally
unsatisfiable. The fraction of problems that PicoSAT finds unsatisfiable after one top-down
GNN2RNN step at leveli is 21%, 80%, 80%, 83% and 80% respectively. Again, we see that
picking the first head symbol for each variable is the hardest, but the system performs well for
the subsequent symbol choices.

2
                                                                                                            Page 105

Learning Instantiation in First-Order Logic                                      Jelle Piepenbrock et al.


   Acknowledgements This work was partially supported by the European Regional Devel-
opment Fund under the Czech project AI&Reasoning no. CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15 003/ 0000466
(JP, JU), Amazon Research Awards (JP, JU) and by the Czech MEYS under the ERC CZ
project POSTMAN no. LL1902 (JP, MJ).


References
 [1] Armin Biere. Picosat essentials. J. Satisf. Boolean Model. Comput., 4(2-4):75–97, 2008.
 [2] Martin Davis. The early history of automated deduction. In Handbook of Automated Reasoning,
     pages 3–15. Elsevier and MIT Press, 2001.
 [3] André Duarte and Konstantin Korovin. Implementing superposition in iProver (system descrip-
     tion). In Nicolas Peltier and Viorica Sofronie-Stokkermans, editors, Automated Reasoning - 10th
     International Joint Conference, IJCAR 2020, Paris, France, July 1-4, 2020, Proceedings, Part II,
     volume 12167 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 388–397. Springer, 2020.
 [4] Harald Ganzinger and Konstantin Korovin. New directions in instantiation-based theorem proving.
     In 18th IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS 2003), 22-25 June 2003, Ottawa,
     Canada, Proceedings, pages 55–64. IEEE Computer Society, 2003.
 [5] Jacques Herbrand. Recherches sur la théorie de la démonstration. Doctorat d’état, La Faculté des
     Sciences de Paris, 1930.
 [6] Jan Jakubuv, Karel Chvalovský, Miroslav Olsák, Bartosz Piotrowski, Martin Suda, and Josef
     Urban. ENIGMA anonymous: Symbol-independent inference guiding machine (system descrip-
     tion). In Nicolas Peltier and Viorica Sofronie-Stokkermans, editors, Automated Reasoning - 10th
     International Joint Conference, IJCAR 2020, Paris, France, July 1-4, 2020, Proceedings, Part II,
     volume 12167 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 448–463. Springer, 2020.
 [7] Cezary Kaliszyk and Josef Urban. Learning-assisted automated reasoning with Flyspeck. J.
     Autom. Reasoning, 53(2):173–213, 2014.
 [8] Cezary Kaliszyk and Josef Urban. MizAR 40 for Mizar 40. J. Autom. Reasoning, 55(3):245–256,
     2015.
 [9] Konstantin Korovin. Inst-Gen - A modular approach to instantiation-based automated reasoning.
     In Andrei Voronkov and Christoph Weidenbach, editors, Programming Logics - Essays in Memory
     of Harald Ganzinger, volume 7797 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 239–270. Springer,
     2013.
[10] Laura Kovács and Andrei Voronkov. First-order theorem proving and Vampire. In Natasha
     Sharygina and Helmut Veith, editors, CAV, volume 8044 of LNCS, pages 1–35. Springer, 2013.
[11] Stephan Schulz. System description: E 1.8. In Kenneth L. McMillan, Aart Middeldorp, and
     Andrei Voronkov, editors, LPAR, volume 8312 of LNCS, pages 735–743. Springer, 2013.
[12] João P. Marques Silva, Inês Lynce, and Sharad Malik. Conflict-driven clause learning SAT solvers.
     In Armin Biere, Marijn Heule, Hans van Maaren, and Toby Walsh, editors, Handbook of Satis-
     fiability, volume 185 of Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications, pages 131–153. IOS
     Press, 2009.
[13] Martin Suda. Improving ENIGMA-style clause selection while learning from history. In CADE,
     volume 12699 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 543–561. Springer, 2021.
[14] Josef Urban. MPTP 0.2: Design, implementation, and initial experiments. J. Autom. Reasoning,
     37(1-2):21–43, 2006.




                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                         Page 106




                A small survey of mathematical abilities
                  of modern transformer architectures∗
                                       Bartosz Piotrowski
               University of Warsaw, Poland, and Czech Technical University, Prague


Introduction Neural networks (NNs) are versatile tools which established state-of-the-art
in multiple domains. In particular, one of the spectacular advances achieved with use of NNs
has been in natural language processing (NLP). Today, the dominating kind of a neural model
used in this domain is based on the transformer architecture [10]. It was also observed that
neural architectures designed for NLP have ability to deal with tasks of symbolic (or algorithmic)
nature. These include: recognizing propositional entailment [2], computing integrals [4], solving
differential equations [1], normalizing polynomials [6], autoformalization [11], premise selection
[5], differentiation, solving linear equations, number base conversion, and many others [9].
     It is not well understood how neural models are able to perform algorithmic tasks well. It
is also unclear what features of a neural architecture make it more suitable for such tasks. In
this work, we make a step towards understanding this. We compare two different architectures
– encoder-decoder versus decoder-only – and two different modes of training – starting from
scratch versus fine-tuning a model pre-trained on a natural language dataset. We also want to
see what is performance of a modern transformer model trained in a practical, limited setting:
training for no more than two days on a single GPU.

Data We took 8 different datasets representing mathematical tasks of varied difficulty: addi-
tion, multiplication, differentiation, integration, solving linear equations, division, number base
conversion, and normalizing polynomials. The first two were created for the purpose of this
work and the remaining six were taken from other works [9, 4, 6]. Each dataset consists of
input-output examples, where input is a query to the model and output in an answer that the
model is trained to produce. For each of the datasets a hold-out testing set of 10000 examples
was drawn. Below there are examples of input-output pairs for the linear equations dataset:

              input                                                                output
              Solve - 3 8 * h - 6 * h + 4 7 8 + 4 0 2 = 0 for h .                  9
              Solve 2 9 * i + 1 3 0 0 = - 3 * i + 4 1 * i - 7 4 * i for i .        - 2 0
              Solve 1 0 4 9 * d = 4 3 1 2 + 5 1 2 9 for d .                        - 4 5

We experimentally established that treating single digits as tokens is better then taking whole
numbers as tokens, and we preprocessed all the datasets accordingly.

Transformer models We compare two different state-of-the-art transformer architectures:
   1. GPT2 [7]: a decoder-only architecture with 124 million of trainable parameters.
   2. T5 [8]: an encoder-decoder architecture (closely following the original transformer model
      described in [10]). We use the T5-small version of this model with 60 million parameters.
    Both GPT2 and T5 proved to perform very well on a range of NLP tasks. For both of them
there are available high-quality pre-trained checkpoints released by the authors of the models.1
  ∗ The author was supported by the grant of National Science Center, Poland, no. 2018/29/N/ST6/02903.
   1 They are available in Huggingface: https://huggingface.co/gpt2, https://huggingface.co/t5-small
                                                                                                                                                      Page 107

A small survey of mathematical abilities of modern transformer architectures                                                                 Piotrowski


                                   dataset                                         T5                              GPT2
                                                        pretrained                      untrained          pretrained      untrained
                     addition                                86.74%                      96.95%              98.60%         99.26%
                     multiplication                          24.10%                      47.58%              46.54%         68.00%
                     division                                67.23%                      70.98%              72.62%         77.16%
                     number base conversion                   0.03%                       2.58%               1.63%         3.52%
                     solving linear equations                37.56%                      17.62%              45.57%         47.40%
                     differentiation                         98.84%                      95.05%              99.80%         99.75%
                     integration                             26.65%                      35.88%              79.70%         81.80%
                     polynomial normalization                58.13%                      90.83%              89.35%         92.93%

    Table 1: Final testing accuracy of neural language models tested on the eight datasets.


Experimental setup We perform the experiments using the Huggingface framework [12].
In each experiment we train with the Adam optimizer [3] with parameters: learning rate =
1e-5, β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, ϵ =1e−8, weight decay = 0. When we fine-tune a pre-trained
model, we must use a tokenizer that comes along with the model – in cases of both GPT2
and T5 these are pre-trained byte pair encoding tokenizers. When training from scratch we
use a simple tokenizer splitting on whitespaces. All trainings were performed using GeForce
GTX 2080 Ti GPUs. We limit all the trainings to passing through a model 64 million training
examples.2 All data and scripts required to reproduce the results presented here are available
at https://github.com/BartoszPiotrowski/transformers-for-mathematics

Results and conclusions Figure 1 shows training curves for one of the datasets – linear
equations. Table 1 shows the final testing accuracy for all the tasks. There are two conclusions:
  1. In almost all cases, the pre-trained versions of models performed worse than the models
     trained from scratch. It likely means that the data on which the models were pre-trained
     does not contain much information relevant for dealing with mathematical problems.
     There are, however, two exceptions: for T5 and datasets on differentiation and solving
     linear equations. Especially for the latter the difference is much in favour of the pre-
     trained version of the model. As for now, we do not have explanation for this.
  2. GPT2 performed better than T5 for all the datasets. It means that decoder-only architec-
     tures are capable of learning mathematical tasks, despite the fact that in most of the cited
     related works encoder-decoder architectures were used. However, it is unclear whether the
     superior performance of GPT2 was due to the different architecture, or possibly because
     of larger number of trainable parameters. Further experiments would be needed.
                                                                                                           Loss
                           Loss                                                Accuracy
                                                                         1.0                       1e+01
                                                                                                                        model
                     3.0                                                 0.8                       1e+00                   GPT2−pretrained


                                                              accuracy
                                                                         0.6                loss   1e−01                   GPT2−untrained
              loss
                     1.0                                                 0.4                                               T5−pretrained
                                                                                                   1e−02
                                                                         0.2                                               T5−untrained
                                                                                                   1e−03
                                                                         0.0
                     0.3
                           0e+00   2e+06     4e+06   6e+06                     0e+00     2e+06        4e+06
                                                                                                      0e+00
                                                                                                          2e+06 6e+06
                                                                                                             4e+06
                                                                                                                6e+06
                                    training_step                                         training_step
                                                                                                     training_step

               Figure 1: Training loss and accuracy on the linear equations dataset.

    2 This is a practical limit – full training takes then, depending on a dataset, between 4 and 50 hours.



2
                                                                                                      Page 108

A small survey of mathematical abilities of modern transformer architectures                 Piotrowski


References
 [1] François Charton, Amaury Hayat, and Guillaume Lample. Learning advanced mathematical com-
     putations from examples. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
     2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021.
 [2] Richard Evans, David Saxton, David Amos, Pushmeet Kohli, and Edward Grefenstette. Can neural
     networks understand logical entailment? In International Conference on Learning Representations,
     2018.
 [3] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Yoshua
     Bengio and Yann LeCun, editors, 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
     2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings, 2015.
 [4] Guillaume Lample and François Charton. Deep learning for symbolic mathematics. In 8th In-
     ternational Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April
     26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net, 2020.
 [5] Bartosz Piotrowski and Josef Urban. Stateful premise selection by recurrent neural networks. In
     Elvira Albert and Laura Kovács, editors, LPAR 2020: 23rd International Conference on Logic for
     Programming, Artificial Intelligence and Reasoning, Alicante, Spain, May 22-27, 2020, volume 73
     of EPiC Series in Computing, pages 409–422. EasyChair, 2020.
 [6] Bartosz Piotrowski, Josef Urban, Chad E. Brown, and Cezary Kaliszyk. Can neural networks
     learn symbolic rewriting? CoRR, abs/1911.04873, 2019.
 [7] Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
     models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.
 [8] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena,
     Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified
     text-to-text transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21:140:1–140:67, 2020.
 [9] David Saxton, Edward Grefenstette, Felix Hill, and Pushmeet Kohli. Analysing mathematical
     reasoning abilities of neural models. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations,
     ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net, 2019.
[10] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
     Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike von
     Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and Roman
     Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on
     Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pages
     5998–6008, 2017.
[11] Qingxiang Wang, Cezary Kaliszyk, and Josef Urban. First experiments with neural translation
     of informal to formal mathematics. In Florian Rabe, William M. Farmer, Grant O. Passmore,
     and Abdou Youssef, editors, 11th International Conference on Intelligent Computer Mathematics
     (CICM 2018), volume 11006 of LNCS, pages 255–270. Springer, 2018.
[12] Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony
     Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, and Jamie Brew. Huggingface’s
     transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. CoRR, abs/1910.03771, 2019.




                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                          Page 109




       Sifting through a large hypothesis space: Revisiting
           differentiable learning through satisfiability ∗
           Stanislaw J. Purgal1 , David M. Cerna2,3 , and Cezary Kaliszyk1
                            1
                              University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria
                        {stanislaw.purgal,cezary.kaliszyk}@uibk.ac.at
     2
       Czech Academy of Sciences Institute of Computer Science (CAS ICS), Prague, Czechia
                                         dcerna@cs.cas.cz
 3
   Research Institute for Symbolic Computation (RISC), Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria
                                        dcerna@risc.jku.at


                                                Abstract
          A difficultly which must be addressed by inductive logical programming (ILP) systems
      is how to deal with the enormous space of plausible solutions. The majority of modern ILP
      systems approach this problem through the meta-learning paradigm, that is, only consider
      plausible solutions which are constructable from a set of clause templates. This approach
      has been adopted by investigations into neuro-symbolic ILP. Our investigation uses clause
      templates together with a variant of δILP , to expand the hypothesis space, rather than
      contract it. Our experiments support the following hypothesis: providing gradient descent
      with a larger solution space aids the discovery of explanatory hypotheses.

    Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) [5] is a form symbolic machine learning approach which
learns explanatory hypothesis from positive and negative evidence together with fixed back-
ground knowledge. These explanatory hypotheses take the form of a logic program. In contrast
to statistical approaches to machine learning, ILP systems are data-efficient in that a complex
hypothesis can be learned from only a few examples; in some cases, even a single example
is sufficient. Additionally, these hypotheses tend to be human-readable and provide a route
towards explainable AI. While there are many positive aspects of the approach, ILP systems
ability to generalize is typically, negatively impacted by noisy input, and is limited to certain
problem domains [1, 4].
    Attempts to combine the flexibility and agnosticism to noise of statistical learning with
the benefits of a firm logical foundation, forms the bedrock of the current investigations into
neuro-symbolic AI [6]. In this abstract, we discuss our modification of a prominent approach
to neuro-symbolic ILP, δILP [3]. This system is based on the learning from satisfiability ILP
paradigm. In the case of δILP, the plausible hypothesis space is turned into a SAT problem
where a model denotes a hypothesis. The hypothesis space is finite as a fixed program template
is provided and the background knowledge is assumed to be ground and finite. This classical
SAT problem can be transformed into a soft SAT problem by replacing the classical operators by
differentiable ones. For example, Classical conjunction is replaced by the product T-norm [2],
X ∧ Y ≡ x ∗ y.
    To understand our investigation we need to briefly introduce the structure of the program
templates used by δILP. Clauses are assumed to be at most length 2, predicate definitions
contain at most 2 clauses, and predicates may take at most 2 arguments. Each auxiliary
predicate definition (including the predicate being learned) is associated with at most two rule
templates defining the structure of its clauses. These rule templates state how many existential
   ∗ Supported by the ERC starting grant no. 714034 SMART, the Math
                                                                         LP project (LIT-2019-7-YOU-213) of
the Linz Institute of Technology and the state of Upper Austria, Cost action CA20111 EuroProofNet.
                                                                                                                       Page 110

Sifting through a large hypothesis space                                            S.J. Purgal, D.M. Cerna, C. Kaliszyk


variables occur within the clause and whether the predicate symbols occurring therein may be
extensional (defined in the background) or intensional (derived during learning).
    Each of the auxiliary predicate definition is associated with a matrix of weights where
each entry denotes how strongly the system believes that a pair of clauses (respecting the rule
templates) is the correct definition for the given predicate. This design choice is prohibitively
expensive and significantly limits uses of the system due to the significant memory requirements.
An alternative would be to assign a weight to each instantiation of the associated rule templates
(so called splitting the definition), however, as discussed in Appendix F of [3], this approach is
less effective for ILP.
    In our investigation, we take definition splitting one step further and split not only the
definitions (as was discussed in Appendix F of [3]), but also the individual rule templates.
This entails that for each auxiliary predicate definition entries in the weight vector denote
how strongly the system believes an instance of a predicate (i.e. father (X, Y )) is the correct
choice for a particular position in a particular clause. This significantly reduces the memory
requirement, but also goes far beyond the relaxations made by the Evans and Grefenstette [3]
which they claim are less effective for ILP. To deal with this issue, instead of providing a program
template which roughly matches the structure of the program we expect the system to find, We
provide our modified δILP with many more auxiliary predicate then needed to construct the
goal program. This is possible giving the memory saving resulting from splitting the weight
matrix twice.
    Let us consider the example fizz ≡ {X|X ∈ N ∧ 0 = X(mod 3)} from [3]. As background
knowledge the authors provided the zero predicate and instances of the successor predicate up
to 6 (i.e. succ(0, 1),....). The positive examples are 0, 3 and 6 while the negative examples are
all other natural numbers less than 6. This example posed a challenge for δILP and only 10%
of the runs resulted in a mean squared error less than 1e − 4. On the contrary, Up to 95% of
our runs passed a validation phase regardless the mean squared error at the time of halting;
The percentage is dependent on how many auxiliary predicates we allowed (see Figure 1).
    This experiment together with a few others seem to contradict the exposition in Ap-
pendix F of [3]. However, it is not clear if these results can be further expended, nor how
this can be generalized to handle more complex ILP task. An alternative approach to a
more efficient search within the large search space would be the inclusion of supervised ma-
chine learning in the proposed framework. We leave these questions to future investigation.
                                                             fail   fuzzy overfit    overfit      fuzzy    ok

                                                      100%
 Possible explanatory Hypothesis
 for fizz example                                     75%


fizz(X):- zero(X).
                                            results
                                                      50%
fizz(X):- p1(X,Y),p2(Y).
p1(X,Y):- succ(Y,Z),succ(Z,X).
                                                      25%
p2(X):- succ(Y,X),fizz(Y).

                                                       0%
                                                             20                40                 60            80

                                                                           number of invented predicates




                                           Figure 1: Percentage of runs finding a crisp so-
                                           lution which passes the validation phase.

2
                                                                                                    Page 111

Sifting through a large hypothesis space                         S.J. Purgal, D.M. Cerna, C. Kaliszyk


References
[1] Andrew Cropper, Sebastijan Dumančić, Richard Evans, and Stephen H. Muggleton. Inductive logic
    programming at 30. Machine Learning, 111(1):147–172, Jan 2022.
[2] Francesc Esteva and Lluıs Godo. Monoidal t-norm based logic:towards a logic for left-continuous
    t-norms. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 124(3):271–288, 2001. Fuzzy Logic.
[3] Richard Evans and Edward Grefenstette. Learning explanatory rules from noisy data. Journal of
    Artificial Intelligence Research, 61:1–64, January 2018.
[4] Mark Law, Alessandra Russo, and Krysia Broda. Inductive learning of answer set programs. In
    Proceedings of Logics in Artificial Intelligence, pages 311–325. Springer, August 2014.
[5] Stephen Muggleton. Inductive logic programming. New Generation Computing, 8(4):295–318,
    February 1991.
[6] Luc De Raedt, Sebastijan Dumancic, Robin Manhaeve, and Giuseppe Marra. From statistical
    relational to neuro-symbolic artificial intelligence. In IJCAI 2020, pages 4943–4950, 2020.




                                                                                                   3
                                                                                                         Page 112




 Project proposal: A modular reinforcement learning based
                automated theorem prover ∗
                                          Boris Shminke1
                            Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, LJAD, France
                                boris.shminke@univ-cotedazur.fr


                                               Abstract
         We propose to build a reinforcement learning prover of independent components: a
      deductive system (an environment), the proof state representation (how an agent sees
      the environment), and an agent training algorithm. To that purpose, we contribute an
      additional Vampire-based environment to gym-saturation package of OpenAI Gym envi-
      ronments for saturation provers. We demonstrate a prototype of using gym-saturation
      together with a popular reinforcement learning framework (Ray RLlib). Finally, we dis-
      cuss our plans for completing this work in progress to a competitive automated theorem
      prover.


1     Introduction and related work
Reinforcement learning (RL) is applied widely in the automated reasoning domain. There
are RL-related (including iterating supervised learning algorithms without applying recent RL
advances) projects for interactive theorem provers (ITPs) (e.g. HOList [2] for HOL Light [8],
ASTactic [33] for Coq [31], or TacticZero [32] for HOL4 [27]) as well as for automated theorem
provers (ATPs) (e.g. Deepire [28] for Vampire [16], ENIGMA [25] for E [12], or rlCoP [13] for
leanCoP [18]). Despite the variety of solutions and ideas, we are not aware of cases of significant
code reuse between such projects.
    We envision a prover capable of learning from its experience and composed of pluggable
building blocks. We hope that such architecture could promote faster experimentation and
easier flow of ideas between different projects for everyone’s progress. For an RL-based prover,
we identify at least three types of modules. They are a deductive system (an environment), a
proof state representation (how an agent sees it), and an agent training algorithm.
    When choosing whether to learn to guide an ITP or an ATP, we prefer the latter since ATPs
can be relatively easy compared as black boxes [30] in contrast to RL guided ITPs, which often
come with their distinctive benchmarks.
    Among ATPs, one can consider saturation provers less suitable for the RL (e.g., see design
considerations from [22]), but several existing projects (like ENIGMA, Deepire or TRAIL [5])
show encouraging results. Keeping that in mind, we decided to concentrate on guiding clause
selection in the saturation algorithm by RL.
    Inspired by HOList, CoqGym (from ASTactic) and lean-gym [20], we have created
gym-saturation [26] — an OpenAI Gym [4] environment for training RL agents to prove
theorems in clausal normal form (CNF) of the Thousands of Problems for Theorem Provers
(TPTP) library [29] language.


  ∗ This work has been supported by the French government, through the 3IA Côte d’Azur Investments in the

Future project managed by the National Research Agency (ANR) with the reference number ANR-19-P3IA-0002
                                                                                                Page 113

Project proposal: A modular reinforcement learning based automated theorem prover        Shminke


2     Recent work in progress
Contemporary RL training algorithms are notorious for the number of details that can differ
from one implementation to another [9]. To eliminate the risk of abandoning an RL algorithm
as unsuitable for guiding an ATP only because of flaws in our implementation of it, we plan
to rely on existing RL frameworks containing tested implementations of well-known baselines.
As a starting point, we have chosen Ray RLlib [17] as a library claiming both deep learning
(DL) framework independence and extendability. Similar solutions like Tensorflow Agents [7]
or Catalyst.RL [15] tend to support only one DL framework, which we wanted to avoid for
greater generality.
    In contrast to CoqGym and others, gym-saturation is not only a ‘gym’ in some general
sense, but it implements the standard OpenAI Gym API. It makes it easier to integrate with
libraries like Ray RLlib. We contribute1 a prototype of such integration. Even together with
some domain related patches, the prototype remains a lightweight collection of wrappers around
standard RLlib classes, taking only around 300 lines of Python code.
    Since we postulated interchangeability of modules, we added a Vampire-based environment
to gym-saturation (see the project page2 for more details) in addition to the already existing
naı̈ve implementation of a saturation loop. Despite a different backend, one can plug a new
environment into the prover prototype without additional edits of RL related code.

Similar systems for connection tableaux There exists a FLoP (Finding Longer Proofs)
project [34] which implements a ProofEnv OpenAI Gym environment for a connection tableaux
calculus, which can guide two different provers (leanCoP and its OCaml reimplementation
fCoP [14]). FLoP shares many architectural features with our work, and we plan to test its
approaches in saturation provers setting.


3     Prototype implementation details
Since this research is still in an early stage, we don’t report any conclusive results of its
performance, only describing the architecture. A prototype prover has two main parts:
gym-saturation as an environment and a patched DQN [10] implementation from Ray RLlib
training an agent. An episode starts with the environment reset. On environment reset, a
random TPTP problem from a training subset is loaded, transformed to the CNF, and becomes
a proof state. After an agent makes an action (selects a clause), the episode can stop for three
reasons: a given clause is empty (refutation proof found, the reward is 1.0; in other cases, it’s
0.0), we reach the step limit (a soft timeout), we reach the maximal number of clauses in the
proof state (a soft memory limit). Only episodes with a positive final reward go to the memory
buffer. Before storing in the buffer, the reward is spread evenly between the clauses from the
proof (others remain zero). A memory buffer can contain the same proof for the same problem
twice or different proofs (maybe of different lengths) for one problem. A training batch can
contain steps from different episodes (and thus different initial environment states). We sample
the memory buffer with higher weights for more recent episodes.




    1 https://github.com/inpefess/basic-rl-prover
    2 https://pypi.org/project/gym-saturation/



2
                                                                                                  Page 114

Project proposal: A modular reinforcement learning based automated theorem prover          Shminke


4     Future plans and discussion
In the prototype, we represent each clause in a proof state only by its size and order number,
applying a logistic regression as a Q-value function. We will need an elaborate feature extraction
procedure to complete this oversimplified model to a competitive ATP. We plan to use graph
neural networks similar to those used for lazyCoP [23] and then compare and combine them with
the graph representation of clause lineage pioneered by Deepire. We also plan to test training
algorithm interchangeability by using IMPALA [6] and Ape-X [11] in addition to DQN.
    A finished project will have to address many different problems. Here we list several obvious
ones.

Delayed reward One of the well-known peculiarities of an ATP is the fact that a reward
can be assigned only after proof is found, which can take a large number of steps in an RL
episode. To make an agent learn to discern good steps, one has to spread the final reward
to all the steps in a finished trajectory. A typical solution is to post-process a trajectory by
assigning positive advantage values only to the steps encountered in a proof, and negative (or
zero) values to all the rest. Here one can argue in favour of both higher values for longer proofs
(since the ability to produce longer proofs is desirable) and higher values for shorter ones (since
more concise proofs for simpler problems are preferable to verbose ones which in turn could
help to find longer proofs otherwise unreachable because of time and memory constraints). A
contrarian approach is to assign positive advantage values for all the steps in a trajectory on
which proof was found, and non-positive to all the steps from trajectories finished because of
the resource limitations. Such an approach works well, for example, in the Atari Pong game,
where it’s practically impossible to judge which action led to a goal.

Sparse positive reward Another well-known problem of applying RL to ATPs is related
to the fact that even sub-human performance still seems out of reach. The majority of proof
attempts finish without proof found. Discarding failed episodes seems too wasteful, although
obvious as a first attempt. An opposite solution (assigning non-positive advantage values to all
failed episodes) makes the training dataset too imbalanced. One possible solution to this is to
use replay buffers and sample from them balanced train batches. This explains why we decided
not to neglect DQN despite its known limitations when compared to on-policy algorithms like
PPO [24].

Multiple proofs Many problems have multiple possible proofs, equivalent in some sense or
not. An agent will have to decide which proofs are preferable to replicate. Again, replay buffers
can be used for that. Ranking proofs can be based on their length or other important properties
(reuse of previously proved lemmata, using only a selected subset of deduction rules or tactics
etc)

High environment’s inhomogeneity Some problems are inherently harder than others
and can belong to areas of mathematics not connected in a given formalization. Curriculum
learning [3] or at least limiting the training scope to a reasonable subset of the TPTP library
will be needed.

State representation Usually, contemporary RL algorithms expect the observed state to
have a form of a vector. Representing logic formulae as such is an active domain of research.

                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                     Page 115

Project proposal: A modular reinforcement learning based automated theorem prover             Shminke


We plan to try both logic-specific approaches like [21] and general abstract syntax tree encoding
models like code2vec [1] or ast2vec [19].



References
 [1] Uri Alon, Meital Zilberstein, Omer Levy, and Eran Yahav. Code2vec: Learning distributed rep-
     resentations of code. Proc. ACM Program. Lang., 3(POPL):40:1–40:29, January 2019.
 [2] Kshitij Bansal, Sarah M. Loos, Markus N. Rabe, Christian Szegedy, and Stewart Wilcox. Holist:
     An environment for machine learning of higher order logic theorem proving. In Kamalika Chaud-
     huri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov, editors, Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Ma-
     chine Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June 2019, Long Beach, California, USA, volume 97 of Pro-
     ceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 454–463. PMLR, 2019.
 [3] Yoshua Bengio, Jérôme Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston. Curriculum learning. In
     Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML ’09, page
     41–48, New York, NY, USA, 2009. Association for Computing Machinery.
 [4] Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang,
     and Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. CoRR, abs/1606.01540, 2016.
 [5] Maxwell Crouse, Ibrahim Abdelaziz, Bassem Makni, Spencer Whitehead, Cristina Cornelio, Pavan
     Kapanipathi, Kavitha Srinivas, Veronika Thost, Michael Witbrock, and Achille Fokoue. A deep
     reinforcement learning approach to first-order logic theorem proving. Proceedings of the AAAI
     Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 35(7):6279–6287, May 2021.
 [6] Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
     Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, Shane Legg, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. IMPALA:
     Scalable distributed deep-RL with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. In Jennifer
     Dy and Andreas Krause, editors, Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
     Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1407–1416. PMLR, 10–
     15 Jul 2018.
 [7] Danijar Hafner, James Davidson, and Vincent Vanhoucke. Tensorflow agents: Efficient batched
     reinforcement learning in tensorflow. CoRR, abs/1709.02878, 2017.
 [8] John Harrison. Hol light: An overview. In Stefan Berghofer, Tobias Nipkow, Christian Urban,
     and Makarius Wenzel, editors, Theorem Proving in Higher Order Logics, pages 60–66, Berlin,
     Heidelberg, 2009. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
 [9] Peter Henderson, Riashat Islam, Philip Bachman, Joelle Pineau, Doina Precup, and David Meger.
     Deep reinforcement learning that matters. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence, 32(1), Apr. 2018.
[10] Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado van Hasselt, Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney,
     Dan Horgan, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Azar, and David Silver. Rainbow: Combining improvements
     in deep reinforcement learning. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
     32(1), Apr. 2018.
[11] Dan Horgan, John Quan, David Budden, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Matteo Hessel, Hado van Has-
     selt, and David Silver. Distributed prioritized experience replay. In International Conference on
     Learning Representations, 2018.
[12] Jan Jakubův and Josef Urban. Enigma: Efficient learning-based inference guiding machine. In
     Herman Geuvers, Matthew England, Osman Hasan, Florian Rabe, and Olaf Teschke, editors,
     Intelligent Computer Mathematics, pages 292–302, Cham, 2017. Springer International Publishing.
[13] Cezary Kaliszyk, Josef Urban, Henryk Michalewski, and Miroslav Olšák. Reinforcement learning
     of theorem proving. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi,
     and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31. Curran
     Associates, Inc., 2018.

4
                                                                                                         Page 116

Project proposal: A modular reinforcement learning based automated theorem prover                Shminke


[14] Cezary Kaliszyk, Josef Urban, and Jiři Vyskočil. Certified connection tableaux proofs for hol light
     and tptp. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Certified Programs and Proofs, CPP ’15, page
     59–66, New York, NY, USA, 2015. Association for Computing Machinery.
[15] Sergey Kolesnikov and Oleksii Hrinchuk. Catalyst.rl: A distributed framework for reproducible
     RL research. CoRR, abs/1903.00027, 2019.
[16] Laura Kovács and Andrei Voronkov. First-order theorem proving and vampire. In Natasha Shary-
     gina and Helmut Veith, editors, Computer Aided Verification, pages 1–35, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013.
     Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[17] Eric Liang, Richard Liaw, Robert Nishihara, Philipp Moritz, Roy Fox, Joseph Gonzalez, Ken
     Goldberg, and Ion Stoica. Ray rllib: A composable and scalable reinforcement learning library.
     CoRR, abs/1712.09381, 2017.
[18] Jens Otten and Wolfgang Bibel. leancop: lean connection-based theorem proving. Journal of
     Symbolic Computation, 36(1):139–161, 2003. First Order Theorem Proving.
[19] Benjamin Paaßen, Irena Koprinska, and Kalina Yacef. Recursive tree grammar autoencoders.
     Machine Learning, Aug 2022.
[20] Stanislas Polu, Jesse Michael Han, Kunhao Zheng, Mantas Baksys, Igor Babuschkin, and Ilya
     Sutskever. Formal mathematics statement curriculum learning. CoRR, abs/2202.01344, 2022.
[21] StanisLaw PurgaL, Julian Parsert, and Cezary Kaliszyk. A study of continuous vector represen-
     tations for theorem proving. Journal of Logic and Computation, 31(8):2057–2083, 02 2021.
[22] Michael Rawson and Giles Reger. A neurally-guided, parallel theorem prover. In Andreas Herzig
     and Andrei Popescu, editors, Frontiers of Combining Systems, pages 40–56, Cham, 2019. Springer
     International Publishing.
[23] Michael Rawson and Giles Reger. lazycop: Lazy paramodulation meets neurally guided search. In
     Anupam Das and Sara Negri, editors, Automated Reasoning with Analytic Tableaux and Related
     Methods - 30th International Conference, TABLEAUX 2021, Birmingham, UK, September 6-9,
     2021, Proceedings, volume 12842 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 187–199. Springer,
     2021.
[24] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
     optimization algorithms. ArXiv, abs/1707.06347, 2017.
[25] Stephan Schulz, Simon Cruanes, and Petar Vukmirović. Faster, higher, stronger: E 2.3. In
     Pascal Fontaine, editor, Automated Deduction – CADE 27, pages 495–507, Cham, 2019. Springer
     International Publishing.
[26] Boris Shminke. gym-saturation: an openai gym environment for saturation provers. Journal of
     Open Source Software, 7(71):3849, 2022.
[27] Konrad Slind and Michael Norrish. A brief overview of hol4. In Otmane Ait Mohamed, César
     Muñoz, and Sofiène Tahar, editors, Theorem Proving in Higher Order Logics, pages 28–32, Berlin,
     Heidelberg, 2008. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[28] Martin Suda. Improving enigma-style clause selection while learning from history. In André
     Platzer and Geoff Sutcliffe, editors, Automated Deduction – CADE 28, pages 543–561, Cham,
     2021. Springer International Publishing.
[29] Geoff Sutcliffe. The TPTP problem library and associated infrastructure - from CNF to th0,
     TPTP v6.4.0. J. Autom. Reason., 59(4):483–502, 2017.
[30] Geoff Sutcliffe. The 10th IJCAR automated theorem proving system competition - CASC-J10. AI
     Commun., 34(2):163–177, 2021.
[31] The Coq Development Team. The coq proof assistant, January 2022.
[32] Minchao Wu, Michael Norrish, Christian Walder, and Amir Dezfouli. Tacticzero: Learning to
     prove theorems from scratch with deep reinforcement learning. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer,
     Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan, editors, Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, volume 34, pages 9330–9342. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.


                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                    Page 117

Project proposal: A modular reinforcement learning based automated theorem prover            Shminke


[33] Kaiyu Yang and Jia Deng. Learning to prove theorems via interacting with proof assistants. In
     Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov, editors, Proceedings of the 36th International
     Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June 2019, Long Beach, California, USA,
     volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 6984–6994. PMLR, 2019.
[34] Zsolt Zombori, Adrián Csiszárik, Henryk Michalewski, Cezary Kaliszyk, and Josef Urban. Towards
     finding longer proofs. In Anupam Das and Sara Negri, editors, Automated Reasoning with Analytic
     Tableaux and Related Methods, pages 167–186, Cham, 2021. Springer International Publishing.




6
                                                                                                                Page 118




                   Elements of Reinforcement Learning in
                     Saturation-based Theorem Proving∗
                                               Martin Suda
                          Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic



The Promise and the Hype
Reinforcement learning (RL) [18], especially its deep variant relying on modern neural networks,
is probably the most fashionable method for attacking problems in our machine learning (ML)
era. The impressive successes in board games [13] or on the ATARI benchmark [3] justify the
excitement. Moreover, it is very appealing to have the machine look for a solution unbiased
by our preconceptions, since this intuitively increases the chances of discovering brand new
strategies. However, we should also be aware of the various shortcomings of the approach [4].
    In automatic theorem proving (ATP), we have seen the Monte-Carlo tree search paradigm
[8] extend a connection tableaux prover [7] or, more recently, a saturation-based setup called
TRAIL [1], featuring an interesting idea of multiplicative attention for expressing a dependence
on prover’s state. Despite the partial successes, we still seem to be far from getting a system that
could challenge a state-of-the-art prover in a real-time evaluation (Kaliszyk et al. [7] use abstract
time, TRAIL falls short of improving over plain E [11]), let alone on a versatile benchmark such
as the TPTP library [17] (both mentioned works target a more uniform Mizar benchmark).

Ancient Lore and its Contemporary Extensions
It is instructive to recall the basic RL ingredients and project them to the state-of-the-art
(SotA) saturation-based ATP technology and its recent improvements by ML. In this light, we
can think of a prover as being guided by an agent, who monitors the prover’s state and chooses
appropriate actions to reach the goal of deriving the empty clause, ideally in the shortest time
possible. A learning feedback for the agent should come in the form of a reward, received after
executing each individual action or at the end of a proof attempt.
    In saturation-based ATP (setting aside the role of proving strategies) the guiding agent
is most fittingly identified with the clause selection heuristic [see, e.g., 12]. A proving state
naturally decomposes into two conceptual parts: a static one, the formula subject to proving,
and an evolving one, any information influencing what should be done next in order to prove
it. Finally, the available actions correspond simply to the passive (unprocessed) clauses.
    The author finds it noteworthy, that SotA provers, backed by decades of research in the
field, mostly ignore the state for clause selection. Except possibly for a few bits to remember
which queue to select the next clause from, the effective state is blank1 and each selection
aims greedily at the best available clause. Could this indicate there is actually little hope for
meaningful proof planning in general purpose ATP?
    The situation is different with the recent improvements by ML. Information about the
conjecture (i.e., a static state) has been included since the second version of ENIGMA [5]
   ∗ Supported by the Czech Science Foundation project 20-06390Y and the project RICAIP no. 857306 under

the EU-H2020 programme.
    1 Conjecture clauses sometimes get a different status for some heuristics [e.g., 14], but only uniformly, not

depending on what the conjecture actually is.
                                                                                                               Page 119




and, before that, by the work of Loos et al. [10]. While the latter paper does not perform a
corresponding ablation, ENIGMA is reported to moderately improve thanks to the conjecture
features.2 As mentioned, an evolving state is proudly included in TRAIL [1] and also in, e.g.,
ENIGMAWatch [2]. In both cases, the papers report on an improvement thanks to the evolving
state feature. Although this is only shown for Mizar, maybe there is hope after all!
    Let us close this section by returning to the concept of reward. It seems unrealistic to ever
learn useful guidance for ATP by only rewarding the final proving step.3 All the mentioned
systems agree and retrospectively reward (or mark as positive) not just the final, but all the
actions that contributed to the found proof. An ambiguity in the terminology seems to arise:
can we have RL without an (explicit) reward? In the light of the just explained, does TRAIL
really differ that much from looping in ENIGMA [6], which also iteratively improves the learned
knowledge, generating training data for the next iteration using the current knowledge?

Back to the Drawing Board
In this project, we want to attack the ATP+RL target from a new angle. Rather than imme-
diately aiming at designing an (end-to-end trainable) agent with access to the complete state
(that could, in principle, solve the whole formula before the search even begins and would,
effectively, only use the prover as a verifier), we want to start as close as possible to the SotA
design and use RL as a research tool to further our understanding of proof search dynamics.
    One possible setup, which is—at first sight—so glaringly impractical that it probably has
not been tried yet, is training an agent on a single problem only. Yes, with a complete state
description the agent can just memorize a proof (once it finds one, maybe after a long initial
search) and then just keep replaying it afterwards. However, there are at least two aspects
which make already this simple setup interesting.
    First, in a typical proof search a complete state description very soon becomes intractably
large to be processed by the agent efficiently (we talk about thousands of clauses generated in
a few seconds) and thus cheaply computable abstractions have to come to rescue. Going back
to the SotA agent, we often find it happy with representing each clause by just two numbers,
its age and weight. Guiding towards a previously seen proof becomes an interesting challenge
for an agent when “partially blindfolded” by simple abstractions.
    The second aspect is the inherent fragility of proof search, on which the author recently shed
light using randomization [16]. It turns out that even very small changes in a concrete run,
introduced at the level of “don’t care non-determinism” such as the exact order of literals in
a newly generated clause, can have a tremendous impact on how long it takes to find a proof.
Further investigation is needed to pinpoint what exactly causes so much chaos in our provers.4
    In this project, we plan to undertake such investigation with the tools of RL, making use of
the randomization code from our previous work [16] to turn theorem proving into a stochastic
environment. This will create a second challenge for our agent, forcing it to seek robust strate-
gies. Ultimately, we would like the agent to be able to recognize situations that are particularly
unstable, so that it could respond particularly carefully. By examining the used features, we,
as prover developers, will then hopefully learn how to build more robust provers ourselves.

   2 There is, however, also a meta-point:   Deepire’s guidance [15] does not depend on the conjecture in this
sense, yet the system achieves a comparable, if not better, performance to ENIGMA on Mizar [6].
    3 And letting the prover figure out which actions were actually useful for the success by trial and error.
    4 Although a major part is probably caused by the eager simplifications and their interactions with clause

selection (generating inferences on their own would stay nicely confluent), there is also the possibility that a
sudden selection of what we could call a “highly explosive clause” dramatically changes the content of the
weight-sorted queue, rendering the previously observed proof out of reach.
                                                                                               Page 120




References
 [1] M. Crouse, I. Abdelaziz, B. Makni, S. Whitehead, C. Cornelio, P. Kapanipathi, K. Srinivas,
     V. Thost, M. Witbrock, and A. Fokoue. A deep reinforcement learning approach to first-
     order logic theorem proving. In Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
     AAAI 2021, Thirty-Third Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence,
     IAAI 2021, The Eleventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence,
     EAAI 2021, Virtual Event, February 2-9, 2021, pp. 6279–6287. AAAI Press, 2021.
 [2] Z. A. Goertzel, J. Jakubuv, and J. Urban. ENIGMAWatch: ProofWatch meets ENIGMA.
     In Automated Reasoning with Analytic Tableaux and Related Methods - 28th International
     Conference, TABLEAUX 2019, London, UK, September 3-5, 2019, Proceedings, vol. 11714
     of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 374–388. Springer, 2019.
 [3] M. Hessel, J. Modayil, H. van Hasselt, T. Schaul, G. Ostrovski, W. Dabney, D. Hor-
     gan, B. Piot, M. G. Azar, and D. Silver. Rainbow: Combining improvements in deep
     reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Arti-
     ficial Intelligence, (AAAI-18), the 30th innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence
     (IAAI-18), and the 8th AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intel-
     ligence (EAAI-18), New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, February 2-7, 2018, pp. 3215–3222.
     AAAI Press, 2018.
 [4] A. Irpan. Deep reinforcement learning doesn’t work yet. https://www.alexirpan.com/
     2018/02/14/rl-hard.html, 2018.
 [5] J. Jakubuv and J. Urban. Enhancing ENIGMA given clause guidance. In Intelligent
     Computer Mathematics - 11th International Conference, CICM 2018, Hagenberg, Austria,
     August 13-17, 2018, Proceedings, vol. 11006 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp.
     118–124. Springer, 2018.
 [6] J. Jakubuv and J. Urban. Hammering mizar by learning clause guidance (short paper).
     In 10th International Conference on Interactive Theorem Proving, ITP 2019, September
     9-12, 2019, Portland, OR, USA, vol. 141 of LIPIcs, pp. 34:1–34:8. Schloss Dagstuhl -
     Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019.
 [7] C. Kaliszyk, J. Urban, H. Michalewski, and M. Olšák. Reinforcement learning of theo-
     rem proving. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31: Annual Confer-
     ence on Neural Information Processing Systems 2018, NeurIPS 2018, December 3-8, 2018,
     Montréal, Canada, pp. 8836–8847, 2018.
 [8] L. Kocsis and C. Szepesvári. Bandit based monte-carlo planning. In ECML 2006, Pro-
     ceedings, vol. 4212 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 282–293. Springer, 2006.
 [9] L. Kovács and A. Voronkov. First-order theorem proving and vampire. In Computer
     Aided Verification - 25th International Conference, CAV 2013, Saint Petersburg, Russia,
     July 13-19, 2013. Proceedings, vol. 8044 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 1–35.
     Springer, 2013.
[10] S. M. Loos, G. Irving, C. Szegedy, and C. Kaliszyk. Deep network guided proof search. In
     LPAR-21, 21st International Conference on Logic for Programming, Artificial Intelligence
     and Reasoning, Maun, Botswana, May 7-12, 2017, vol. 46 of EPiC Series in Computing,
     pp. 85–105. EasyChair, 2017.
                                                                                                 Page 121




[11] S. Schulz, S. Cruanes, and P. Vukmirović. Faster, higher, stronger: E 2.3. In Proc. of the
     27th CADE, Natal, Brasil, number 11716 in LNAI, pp. 495–507. Springer, 2019.
[12] S. Schulz and M. Möhrmann. Performance of clause selection heuristics for saturation-
     based theorem proving. In Automated Reasoning - 8th International Joint Conference,
     IJCAR 2016, Coimbra, Portugal, June 27 - July 2, 2016, Proceedings, vol. 9706 of Lecture
     Notes in Computer Science, pp. 330–345. Springer, 2016.
[13] D. Silver, T. Hubert, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, M. Lai, A. Guez, M. Lanctot, L. Sifre,
     D. Kumaran, T. Graepel, T. Lillicrap, K. Simonyan, and D. Hassabis. A general reinforce-
     ment learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and Go through self-play. Science,
     362(6419):1140–1144, 2018.
[14] M. Suda. Aiming for the goal with sine. In Vampire 2018 and Vampire 2019. The 5th
     and 6th Vampire Workshops, vol. 71 of EPiC Series in Computing, pp. 38–44. EasyChair,
     2019.
[15] M. Suda. Vampire with a brain is a good ITP hammer. In Frontiers of Combining Systems
     - 13th International Symposium, FroCoS 2021, Birmingham, UK, September 8-10, 2021,
     Proceedings, vol. 12941 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 192–209. Springer, 2021.
[16] M. Suda. Vampire getting noisy: Will random bits help conquer chaos? (system descrip-
     tion). EasyChair Preprint no. 7719, EasyChair, 2022.

[17] G. Sutcliffe. The TPTP Problem Library and Associated Infrastructure. From CNF to
     TH0, TPTP v6.4.0. Journal of Automated Reasoning, 59(4):483–502, 2017.
[18] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto. Reinforcement learning - an introduction. Adaptive com-
     putation and machine learning. MIT Press, 1998.
                                                                                                       Page 122




         Formal Premise Selection With Language Models
       Szymon Tworkowski∗1 , Maciej Mikula∗1 , Tomasz Odrzygóźdź∗5 , Konrad Czechowski∗1 ,
     Szymon Antoniak∗1 , Albert Q. Jiang3 , Christian Szegedy2 , Lukasz Kuciński4 , Piotr Miloś4 ,
                                            Yuhuai Wu2
                              1
                                  University of Warsaw, 2 Google Research
              3
                  University of Cambridge, 4 Polish Academy of Sciences, 5 IDEAS NCBR


                                               Abstract
          Premise selection, the problem of selecting a useful premise to prove a new theorem,
      is an essential part of theorem proving. Existing language models cannot access knowl-
      edge beyond a small context window, and therefore are unsatisfactory at retrieving useful
      premises (i.e., premise selection) from large databases for theorem proving. In this work,
      we provide a solution to this problem, by combining a premise selection model with a lan-
      guage model. We first select a handful (e.g., 8) of premises from a large theorem database
      consisting of 100K premises, and present them in the context along with proof states. The
      language model then utilizes these premises to construct a proof step. We show that this
      retrieval-augmented prover achieves significant improvements in proof rates compared to
      the language model alone.


1     Introduction
Language models have been recently applied to theorem proving [17, 25, 12, 14, 24] and
program synthesis [7, 2, 20], achieving impressive results. Premise selection is a fundamental
aspect of formal mathematics [28, 1, 4]. Early works in this domain often relied on symbolic
[19, 5] or hybrid [15] approaches. Classical ML algorithms [30, 29, 9] have also proven effective,
frequently outperforming symbolic methods by significant margins. More recently, graph neural
networks mimicking the symbolic structure of mathematical expressions have shown promising
results [22, 33, 10, 18].
    Effective retrieval of premises from large databases is still an open challenge. In this work,
we propose to approach it with a two-stage procedure, which, to the best of our knowledge, is
the first method to do the selection process globally over the whole corpus. Firstly, a premise
selection model (PSM) picks a handful (e.g. 8) of premises from a database. These are then pre-
sented, along with a proof state, to a premise selection guided language model (PGLM) respon-
sible for generating a proof step. Importantly, our PSM can efficiently query large databases;
in our case, we use over 100K lemmas from the entire Isabelle corpus. By providing a relatively
small number of premises in context, we allow the PGLM to efficiently retrieve the correct ones,
aiming to leverage its in-context learning capabilities [16].

2     Method
Premise selection model (PSM) is based on a batch contrastive learning approach similar
to [1, 3, 26, 11]. It encodes proof state and premise text into embeddings. The cosine similarity
of a given premise embedding and a proof state embedding estimates their mutual relevance.
Premise embeddings can be precomputed and cached, allowing for the use of large databases.

    ∗ Equal Contribution
                                                                                                        Page 123

Formal Premise Selection With Language Models                                         Tworkowski et al.


    Premise-guided language model (PGLM) is a model for proof step generation. It
takes as an input the current proof state s and premises (names and statements) selected by
PSM. These are e.g. k = 8 premises from the whole database with the highest relevance to s.
    We first train the PSM, then freeze the weights and use it in the training process of PGLM.
The PGLM is designed to perform premise-aware proof step generation. By design, given
the (small) context of k premises, the model selects the relevant ones to be applied in the
generated proof step. This setup is motivated by recent findings [16] showing that LMs can
grasp dependencies in the text within the same input much better than ones occurring across
different training examples. The latter is how the state-only (our baseline model, described
below) approach works. We hope that in-context learning helps the model focus on premise
selection instead of memorization of frequently-occurring premises (as we hypothesize the state-
only models do).
    The State-only model is a language model that, given a proof state (goal), predicts the
proof step. This is the most common setup found in prior work [14, 12, 24], used here as a
baseline.

3      Experiments
We conduct our interactive theorem proving experiments on a dataset collected in Isabelle [23]
which is one of the largest corpora of formal proofs. To interact with the formal environment,
we use PISA [14]. The proof rates are presented in the table below.

    Method                        Proof rate, full   Proof rate, ≥ 1 premise   Proof rate, 0 premises
    Sledgehammer [5] (baseline)            22.4%                       17.7%                   27.5%
    State-only (baseline)                  39.8%                       14.7%                   67.1%
    PGLM+PSM (ours)                       43.1%                       19.6%                   68.6%
    PGLM+PSM ∪ State-only                 47.2%                       22.6%                   73.9%

Table 1: Proof rate is evaluated using a best-first search solver, similar to the one mentioned in
[14], on a test set of 1000 theorems. We split the test dataset into proofs originally using and
not using premises; denoted ≥ 1 premise and 0 premises, respectively. For the sledgehammer
baseline we use 50s timeout per proof.

    Our method, PGLM+PSM, performs significantly better on theorems that require at least
one premise and fares well on the entire test set. This indicates that the proposed two-stage
method is efficient in premise retrieval. Furthermore, a significant improvement is observed
when PGLM+PSM and the state-only model are combined. This is especially visible on the
full test set, indicating that both methods have complementary strengths.

4      Conclusion and future work
We present a simple method integrating premise selection with language models, which is guided
by an external retriever model. We show proof rate improvements when compared to a state-
only baseline and demonstrate that our model is capable of generating novel proofs that utilise
premises.
   We speculate that scaling up our approach will further increase its capabilities. In partic-
ular, we hypothesise that in-context premise selection performance will improve due to better
generalisation to unseen premises. If true, it would indicate better reasoning potential of the
underlying language model, and as such is an attractive research direction.

2
                                                                                                     Page 124

Formal Premise Selection With Language Models                                        Tworkowski et al.


References

 [1] Alex A. Alemi, Francois Chollet, Niklas Een, Geoffrey Irving, Christian Szegedy, and Josef Urban.
     Deepmath - deep sequence models for premise selection, 2016.
 [2] Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Do-
     han, Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, and Charles Sutton. Program synthesis
     with large language models, 2021.
 [3] Kshitij Bansal, Sarah M. Loos, Markus N. Rabe, Christian Szegedy, and Stewart Wilcox. Holist:
     An environment for machine learning of higher order logic theorem proving. In Kamalika Chaud-
     huri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov, editors, Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Ma-
     chine Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June 2019, Long Beach, California, USA, volume 97 of Pro-
     ceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 454–463. PMLR, 2019.
 [4] Kshitij Bansal, Christian Szegedy, Markus N. Rabe, Sarah M. Loos, and Viktor Toman. Learning
     to reason in large theories without imitation, 2019.
 [5] Sascha Böhme and Tobias Nipkow. Sledgehammer: judgement day. In International Joint Con-
     ference on Automated Reasoning, pages 107–121. Springer, 2010.
 [6] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
     wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
     Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler,
     Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott
     Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
     Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020.
 [7] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
     Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
     Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
     Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
     Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fo-
     tios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex
     Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saun-
     ders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa,
     Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob
     McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating
     large language models trained on code, 2021.
 [8] Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason
     Phang, Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, Shawn Presser, and Connor Leahy. The pile:
     An 800gb dataset of diverse text for language modeling, 2021.
 [9] Thibault Gauthier and Cezary Kaliszyk. Premise selection and external provers for hol4. In
     Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Certified Programs and Proofs, CPP ’15, page 49–57, New
     York, NY, USA, 2015. Association for Computing Machinery.
[10] Zarathustra A. Goertzel, Jan Jakubův, Cezary Kaliszyk, Miroslav Olšák, Jelle Piepenbrock, and
     Josef Urban. The isabelle enigma, 2022.
[11] Jesse Han, Tao Xu, Stanislas Polu, Arvind Neelakantan, and Alec Radford. Contrastive finetun-
     ing of generative language models for informal premise selection. 6th Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence and Theorem Proving, 2021.
[12] Jesse Michael Han, Jason Rute, Yuhuai Wu, Edward W. Ayers, and Stanislas Polu. Proof artifact
     co-training for theorem proving with language models. ICLR, 2022.
[13] Mauro Jaskelioff and Stephan Merz. Proving the correctness of disk paxos. Archive of Formal
     Proofs, June 2005. http://isa-afp.org/entries/DiskPaxos.html, Formal proof development.
[14] Albert Qiaochu Jiang, Wenda Li, Jesse Michael Han, and Yuhuai Wu. Lisa: Language models of
     isabelle proofs. 6th Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Theorem Proving, 2021.

                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                       Page 125

Formal Premise Selection With Language Models                                          Tworkowski et al.


[15] Daniel Kühlwein, Jasmin Christian Blanchette, Cezary Kaliszyk, and Josef Urban. Mash: Machine
     learning for sledgehammer. In Sandrine Blazy, Christine Paulin-Mohring, and David Pichardie,
     editors, Interactive Theorem Proving, pages 35–50, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013. Springer Berlin Hei-
     delberg.
[16] Yoav Levine, Noam Wies, Daniel Jannai, Dan Navon, Yedid Hoshen, and Amnon Shashua. The
     inductive bias of in-context learning: Rethinking pretraining example design. In International
     Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
[17] Wenda Li, Lei Yu, Yuhuai Wu, and Lawrence C. Paulson. Isarstep: a benchmark for high-level
     mathematical reasoning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
[18] Zhaoyu Li, Binghong Chen, and Xujie Si. Graph contrastive pre-training for effective theorem
     reasoning, 2021.
[19] Jia Meng and Lawrence Paulson. Lightweight relevance filtering for machine-generated resolution
     problems. J. Applied Logic, 7:41–57, 03 2009.
[20] Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David
     Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, Charles Sutton, and Au-
     gustus Odena. Show your work: Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models.
     In Deep Learning for Code Workshop, 2022.
[21] Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive
     predictive coding, 2018.
[22] Aditya Paliwal, Sarah Loos, Markus Rabe, Kshitij Bansal, and Christian Szegedy. Graph repre-
     sentations for higher-order logic and theorem proving, 2019.
[23] Lawrence C. Paulson. Isabelle: The next 700 theorem provers. 1993.
[24] Stanislas Polu, Jesse Michael Han, Kunhao Zheng, Mantas Baksys, Igor Babuschkin, and Ilya
     Sutskever. Formal mathematics statement curriculum learning, 2022.
[25] Stanislas Polu and Ilya Sutskever. Generative language modeling for automated theorem proving,
     2020.
[26] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
     Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
     Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision, 2021.
[27] Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
     models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.
[28] Christian Szegedy. A promising path towards autoformalization and general artificial intelligence.
     In Christoph Benzmüller and Bruce Miller, editors, Intelligent Computer Mathematics, pages 3–20,
     Cham, 2020. Springer International Publishing.
[29] Agnieszka Slowik, Chaitanya Mangla, Mateja Jamnik, Sean B. Holden, and Lawrence C. Paulson.
     Bayesian optimisation with gaussian processes for premise selection, 2019.
[30] Josef Urban, Geoff Sutcliffe, Petr Pudlák, and Jiřı́ Vyskočil. Malarea sg1 - machine learner for
     automated reasoning with semantic guidance. In Alessandro Armando, Peter Baumgartner, and
     Gilles Dowek, editors, Automated Reasoning, pages 441–456, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008. Springer
     Berlin Heidelberg.
[31] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
     Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need, 2017.
[32] Ben Wang and Aran Komatsuzaki. GPT-J-6B: A 6 Billion Parameter Autoregressive Language
     Model. https://github.com/kingoflolz/mesh-transformer-jax, May 2021.
[33] Mingzhe Wang, Yihe Tang, Jian Wang, and Jia Deng. Premise selection for theorem proving by
     deep graph embedding, 2017.




4
                                                                                                  Page 126

Formal Premise Selection With Language Models                                     Tworkowski et al.


A     Experimental setup
A.1     LM setup
For language modeling, we use a decoder-only transformer [31] with 30M non-embedding pa-
rameters. The setup (weight initialization, positional embeddings, and other architectural hy-
perparameters) is exactly the same as in GPT-J [32]. We use a pretrained BPE tokenizer from
[27]. Similarly to GPT-f [25], the loss function is calculated only on the proof step tokens. As
a context for proof step generation we use one sentence representing the proof state for state
only model, and premises + proof state sentence for PGLM+PSM setup.
    For the PGLM+PSM model, in our main result, we provide it with top k = 4 premises from
the premise selection model.
    All of the models are pretrained on The Pile [8] - GitHub + arXiv dataset for 500k steps
with context length of 2048 as in [6] and total batch size of 217 tokens per update.

A.2     PSM setup
We modify the InfoNCE [21] loss by only using row-wise softmax (column-wise softmax is
ablated). Batch size of 512 proof states is used. We also randomly sample 1536 additional
negative premises within a batch (512 proof states and 2048 premises in each batch, for each
proof state there is exactly one positive premise and 2047 negatives), and we find it helpful
to the score (see Tab. 2). We use a non-pretrained, 6-layer decoder-only transformer (15M
non-embedding parameters).


B     Dataset and Environment
Isabelle [23] is an interactive theorem prover (ITP). It allows mathematical formulas to be
expressed in a formal language and provides tools for proving those formulas, which are verified
by a logical kernel. Its main application is the formalization of mathematical proofs and in
particular formal verification, which includes proving the correctness of computer hardware or
software and proving properties of computer languages and protocols. Each Isabelle library is
composed of theories. A proof for a given theorem is a sequence of proof steps, with each
step being a proof tactic or part of a declaration. Each subsequent proof step changes the state
(referred to as proof state) of the current proof. A proof step can make use of premises,
which are simply references to definitions, axioms, or previously proven theorems. This theorem
proving setting constitutes a Partially Observable Decision Process and thus can be represented
by a sequential decision process in a certain environment. An example of such an environment
is the PISA environment [14], which we used for all the experiments. We trained models using
a dataset mined from the Archive of Formal Proofs (AFP)[13] and all the standard libraries
available in Isabelle. The dataset consists of 220K lemmas, with a total of 2.4M (proof state,
proof step) pairs. For the premise selection task, we chose the proof steps that utilised at least
one premise, which resulted in 400K training examples.


C     Premise selection - ablation study
We investigate what contributes to the performance of our retrieval model by reducing its
expressive power to a 1-layer transformer (first experiment), as well as removing our negative
sampling strategy (second experiment). We observe a significant drop in recall with the changes.

                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                   Page 127

Formal Premise Selection With Language Models                                    Tworkowski et al.


    Model                   recall@1   recall@4   recall@8   recall@16   recall@64   recall@128
    1L transformer             0.168      0.347      0.447       0.565       0.663         0.809
    6L transformer             0.203      0.408      0.516       0.621       0.781         0.832
    6L transformer + neg.     0.230      0.446      0.561       0.656       0.793         0.839

Table 2: Retrieval metrics (top-k recall) comparison. On the test dataset, we measure per-
centage of situations, where given a proof state, the ground truth premise has been retrieved
among top-k according to the PSM model. The 6L transformer + neg. entry refers to a model
utilizing our negative sampling strategy with 1536 additionally sampled negatives (see A.2 for
details).



D       Proofs

                Theorem 1:
                lemma reachable steps: "<exists> xs. steps xs <and> hd
                xs = s<^
                       sub> <and> last xs = x" if "reachable x"

                Original proof:
                using that
                unfolding reachable def
                proof induction
                case base
                then
                show ?case
                by (inst existentials "[s^
                                         sub>0]"; force)
                next
                case (step y z)
                from step.IH
                guess xs
                by clarify
                with step.hyps
                show ?case
                apply (inst existentials "xs @ [z]")
                apply (force intro: graphI)
                by (cases xs; auto)+
                qed

                Our proof:
                using that
                unfolding reachable def
                by (fastforce dest: reaches steps)




                Proof 1: Our model is capable of proposing short and neat proofs
                when compared to the original.

6
                                                                                               Page 128

Formal Premise Selection With Language Models                                  Tworkowski et al.


               Theorem 2:
               lemma (in wf digraph) iapath dist ends: "<And>u p v.
               iapath u p v <Longrightarrow> u <noteq> v"

               Original proof:
               unfolding pre digraph.gen iapath def
               by (metis apath ends)

               Our proof:
               by (unfold gen iapath def) (auto dest:
               apath nonempty ends)



               Proof 2: Exemplary proof that state-only model failed to close,
               whereas our PGLM+PSM managed to derive a fundamentally dif-
               ferent proof without using metis - in contrast to original proof.


E     Inputs comparison

 <|PREMISE NAME|>less top ennreal
 <|PREMISE|>"x < top <longleftrightarrow> (<exists>r<ge>0. x = ennrealr)"
 <|PREMISE NAME|>fact dvd higher pderiv
 <|PREMISE|>"[:fact n :: int:] dvd (pderiv ^^ n) p"
 <|PREMISE NAME|>sameDom sym
 <|PREMISE|>"sameDom inp inp’ = sameDom inp’ inp"
 <|PREMISE NAME|>moebius inverse
 <|PREMISE|>assumes "a * d <noteq> b * c" "c * z + d <noteq> 0" shows "moebius
 d (-b) (-c) a (moebius a b c d z) = z"
 <|ISA OBS|>proof (prove) goal (1 subgoal): 1. prv (neg <phi>R)
 <|PREV STEPS|>have "prv (neg <phi>R)"<|PROOF STEP|>



 Input 1: Exemplary input for PGLM+PSM model with top-4 premises. Input is a single
 sentence, here, for readability, split into multiple lines.

 <|ISA OBS|>proof (prove) goal (1 subgoal): 1. prv (neg <phi>R)
 <|PREV STEPS|>have "prv (neg <phi>R)"<|PROOF STEP|>



 Input 2: Exemplary input for classical State-only model. Input is a single sentence, here, for
 readability, split into multiple lines.




                                                                                              7
                                                                                                         Page 129




         NaturalProver: Grounded Natural Language
            Proof Generation with Language Models
                             Sean Welleck12∗ , Jiacheng Liu1∗ ,
                      Ximing Lu2 , Hannaneh Hajishirzi12 , Yejin Choi12
     1
         University of Washington, 2 Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence, ∗ Equal Contribution

Introduction. We envision assistive systems for informal mathematics that suggest proof
steps or solutions to a user, inspired by the use of language models in formal proof assistants (e.g.
[4, 6, 7, 8, 11]) and informal premise selection [3, 5, 13]. We study two new generation tasks in
natural mathematical language: suggesting the next step in a proof, and full-proof generation.
     We develop NaturalProver, a language model that generates proofs by conditioning
on background references (theorems, definitions), and optionally enforces their presence with
constrained decoding. NaturalProver improves the quality of next-step suggestions and
generated proofs over fine-tuned GPT-3 [1], with either retrieved or human-provided references,
according to human evaluations from university-level mathematics students.
     NaturalProver is capable of proving short (2-6 step) theorems and providing next-step
suggestions that are rated as correct and useful more than 50% of the time, which is to our
knowledge the first demonstration of these capabilities using neural language models.
     Data. We create a NaturalProofs-Gen dataset with data adapted from the ProofWiki
domain of NaturalProofs [13]. Each example pairs a theorem x with a gold proof y =
(y1 , . . . , yT ), where each yt is a variable-length proof step. Each proof mentions references
{r1 , . . . , rRy } from a reference set of roughly 33k theorems and definitions, analogous to how
Wikipedia articles reference other pages. For example, Figure 1 shows a 4-step proof with
references in blue. We use splits from NaturalProofs for training, and create evaluation sets
with 100 validation and 100 test theorems.
     Tasks. The proof generation task is to generate a proof y given theorem x. The next-step
task is to generate a next step yt given theorem x and proof history y<t from a gold proof. We
consider an additional provided setting where the model is given gold references {r∗1 , . . . , r∗Ry }.
Methods. We study a vanilla language model and two ‘knowledge-grounded’ variations, along
with the effect of constrained decoding. For each model, we fine-tune GPT-3 Curie, a ≈13B
parameter autoregressive transformer language model trained on internet text.1




                Figure 1: NaturalProver proves Even Integer Plus 5 is Odd.
  1 https://blog.eleuther.ai/gpt3-model-sizes/. We use the OpenAI API. We also release open-source

GPT-J and GPT-2 models, fine-tuning and evaluation code, and the NaturalProofs-Gen dataset.
                                                                                                       Page 130

NaturalProver: Grounded Natural Language Proof Generation with Language Models             Welleck, Sean


                         Reasoning Errs (↓) Lexical Errs (↓) Per-Step (↑)  Full Proof (↑)
        Method            Ref. Eqn. Other Lang.        Sym. Useful Correct Useful Correct
        GPT-3 (curie) 30.92 32.54 40.15          5.61      5.24 25.69      28.18   20%      13%
        Retrieved      23.52 37.55 23.66         4.54      6.19 41.54      33.56   32%      24%
        Provided       25.84 35.93 25.23         8.41      5.35 39.60      26.30   35%      24%
         +constrained 23.61 28.54 18.45          5.58      3.65 46.57     35.41    45%      32%
        Next-step        19.70   26.32   19.10   8.57      5.86   51.43    42.86       –        –

      Table 1: Human evaluation results for full-proof and next-step generation (bottom).


     The knowledge-grounded models condition on references, pθ (y|x, R). As language model
context windows prevent conditioning on full reference documents, we condition on reference
titles, and fine-tune on (title, content) pairs, which lets the model memorize the associated
content. For example, Fig 1 shows Even Integer and its content. We study 3 variants:
    1. Baseline. This model is simply fine-tuned on the 12.5k (theorem, proof) training examples.
       At test time, the model is given a theorem and uses greedy decoding to generate a proof.
    2. Retrieved. This model is conditioned on retrieved references, pθ (y|x, r̂1 , . . . , r̂20 ). We
       use a pretrained joint retrieval model from [13], which was trained on NaturalProofs to
       map each theorem to the references in its ground-truth proof. At test time, we condition
       on a test theorem and its top-20 retrieved reference titles, and use greedy decoding.
    3. Provided. This model is conditioned on human-provided references, pθ (y|x, r∗1 , . . . , r∗Ry ),
       meaning {r∗1 , . . . , r∗Ry } is the set of reference-titles mentioned in a ground-truth proof. At
       test time, the model receives a test theorem and reference titles from a ground-truth proof.
    Constrained decoding. We use constrained decoding to improve reference usage in the
provided setting, as references are known to be relevant to a proof of the theorem. We generate
step-by-step by sampling multiple step candidates, keeping those with high log-probability and
reference-coverage in a beam, and continuing to the next step.
    Evaluation. We created a schema of reasoning and lexical errors and an online system for per-
step and full proof annotation. We recruited 15 students from the Departments of Mathematics
and Applied Mathematics at the University of Washington as annotators. Annotators label
the {0, 1} correctness, usefulness, and presence of errors in each proof step, then rate the full
proof’s correctness and usefulness. We also find positive correlations between human judgments
and automatic lexical (e.g. Gleu) and grounding (e.g. Reference-F1) metrics and discuss these
results in the talk.
    Main results. We show our main human evaluation results in Table 1. Knowledge-grounding,
either retrieved or human provided, improves proof generation. Constrained decoding further
improves the provided-knowledge model, with 32% of its proofs rated as correct and 45% rated
as useful as an aid for human proof writers. On the per-step level, 35% of its proof steps are
correct and 47% are useful, increasing to 51% useful and 43% correct given a correct proof-so-far.
On the other hand, our models often struggle with correctly deploying and utilizing references
(23.6% reference error rate), doing symbolic derivations (28.5% equation error rate), and longer
proofs. We give quantitative and qualitative analyses of these successes and errors in the talk.
    Looking forward. Our results suggest that useful interactive proof assistants for in-
formal mathematics are plausible as methods improve further. Investigating architectural
improvements [14], iterative improvement [2, 7], and pretraining [9], as well as the role of
formalization [10, 12] in informal proof generation are interesting future directions.

2
                                                                                                       Page 131

NaturalProver: Grounded Natural Language Proof Generation with Language Models            Welleck, Sean


References
 [1] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
     Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
     Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, T. J. Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler,
     Jeff Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
     Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
     and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. ArXiv, abs/2005.14165, 2020.
 [2] Bhavana Dalvi, Oyvind Tafjord, and Peter Clark. Towards teachable reasoning systems. ArXiv,
     abs/2204.13074, 2022.
 [3] Deborah Ferreira and André Freitas. Natural language premise selection: Finding supporting
     statements for mathematical text. In Proceedings of the 12th Language Resources and Evalua-
     tion Conference, pages 2175–2182, Marseille, France, May 2020. European Language Resources
     Association.
 [4] Jesse Michael Han, Jason Rute, Yuhuai Wu, Edward Ayers, and Stanislas Polu. Proof artifact
     co-training for theorem proving with language models. In International Conference on Learning
     Representations, 2022.
 [5] Jesse Michael Han, Tao Xu, Stanislas Polu, Arvind Neelakantan, and Alec Radford. Contrastive
     finetuning of generative language models for informal premise selection. In AITP, 2021.
 [6] Albert Qiaochu Jiang, Wenda Li, Jesse Michael, Han Openai, and Yuhuai Wu. LISA: Language
     models of ISAbelle proofs. In AITP, 2021.
 [7] Stanislas Polu, Jesse Michael Han, Kunhao Zheng, Mantas Baksys, Igor Babuschkin, and Ilya
     Sutskever. Formal mathematics statement curriculum learning, 2022.
 [8] Stanislas Polu and Ilya Sutskever. Generative language modeling for automated theorem proving,
     2020.
 [9] Markus Norman Rabe, Dennis Lee, Kshitij Bansal, and Christian Szegedy. Mathematical reasoning
     via self-supervised skip-tree training. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
     2021.
[10] Christian Szegedy, editor. A Promising Path Towards Autoformalization and General Artificial
     Intelligence, 2020.
[11] Josef Urban and Jan Jakubův. First neural conjecturing datasets and experiments. In Lecture
     Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture
     Notes in Bioinformatics), 2020.
[12] Qingxiang Wang, Chad Brown, Cezary Kaliszyk, and Josef Urban. Exploration of neural machine
     translation in autoformalization of mathematics in Mizar. In CPP 2020 - Proceedings of the 9th
     ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Certified Programs and Proofs, co-located with POPL
     2020, 2020.
[13] Sean Welleck, Jiacheng Liu, Ronan Le Bras, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Yejin Choi, and Kyunghyun
     Cho. Naturalproofs: Mathematical theorem proving in natural language. In Thirty-fifth Conference
     on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 1), 2021.
[14] Yuhuai Wu, Markus Norman Rabe, DeLesley Hutchins, and Christian Szegedy. Memorizing
     transformers. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.




                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                Page 132




        Compressed Combinatory Proof Structures and
        Blending Goal- with Axiom-Driven Reasoning:
            Perspectives for First-Order ATP with
        Condensed Detachment and Clausal Tableaux
                                    Christoph Wernhard
                                University of Potsdam, Germany
                                 info@christophwernhard.com


1    Background
Goal-driven first-order provers such as leanCoP [14] or SETHEO [9], which may described
as based on clausal tableaux [8], the connection method [1, 3] or model elimination [12], in
essence enumerate tree-shaped proof structures, interwoven with unification of formulas that
are associated with nodes of the structures. While they do not compete with state-of-the
art systems in the range of solvable problems, they have merits that are relevant in certain
contexts: Proofs are typically emitted as data structures of simple and detailed forms, making
them suitable as inputs for further processing. Through iterative deepening, proofs tend to be
short. The provers facilitate comparing alternate proofs of a problem or influencing the shape
of proofs. Implementations can be manageable and small [18], making the approach attractive
for adaptation to specific logics [15, 16, 17] and novel combinations with other techniques
[7, 31, 32, 6].
    Here we aim to preserve the merits of that approach, while moving on to stronger proving
capabilities. Our concrete starting point is a view of condensed detachment as a specialization
of the connection method [29]. It provides a simplified variant of first-order ATP that still has
many of its essential characteristics and seems suitable as basis for the development and study
of new techniques. Emphasis is on the explicit consideration of proof structures in a simple
form, as full binary trees or terms. Condensed detachment has dedicated applications in the
investigation of propositional logics [24], reflected in about 200 such TPTP problems [27], and
can be more generally used as inference rule for arbitrary first-order Horn problems.
    The contribution is based on [29] as well as ongoing work [27, 28]. It is backed by an
implemented system, CD Tools, available as free software from

                       http://cs.christophwernhard.com/cdtools/.

The system website also provides detailed result tables for experiments, including graphical
proof visualizations.


2    Theses
In the contribution we elaborate the following two theses.

Thesis 1: Compressed Combinatory Proof Structures. Representing a proof tree by
a combinator term [23, 30] that normalizes to the tree lets subtle forms of duplication within
                                                                                                  Page 133

Compressed Combinatory Proof Structures, Blending Goal- with Axiom-Driven Reasoning    C. Wernhard


the tree materialize as duplicated subterms of the combinator term. In a DAG representation
of the combinator term these straightforwardly factor into shared subgraphs. As an example,
consider the proof tree
                                      2(2(2(2(2(2(2(21))))))).                                  (i)

Here 1, 2 are axiom identifiers and inner nodes correspond to a condensed detachment step with
left and right children as proofs of major and minor, resp., premises. The notation for the inner
detachment nodes follows the common notation for application in λ- and combinator terms,
i.e., as juxtaposition of left and right subtree, with parentheses according to left associativity.
Tree (i) can be expressed with the combinator term

                                  B(B22)(B22)(B(B22)(B22)1),                                   (ii)

where B22 and B(B22)(B22) each have two incoming edges in the minimal DAG. To search for
proofs, combinator terms can be enumerated, like clausal tableaux, with simultaneously relating
formulas associated with components of the enumerated structures through unification. From
the clausal tableaux or connection method point of view, the approach realizes compressions
known from the connection structure calculus [4, 5, 2], which was never implemented. As a
refinement to restrict the search space, the enumeration of combinator terms can be based
on proof schemas, pattern terms such as r(p, q), with an associated semantics defined by a
combinator term with parameters p, q.


Thesis 2: Blending Goal- with Axiom-Driven Reasoning. The goal-driven proof struc-
ture enumeration by clausal tableau methods can be generalized beneficially to a method that
blends with axiom-driven enumeration in configurable ways. The core method then enumerates
proof structures, paired with the most general theorems (MGTs) [29] proven by them from
given axioms, on a given level, characterized for example by the number of tree nodes or tree
height. In axiom-driven mode, the proof structure and the corresponding MGT are both out-
puts whose values can be cached. In goal-driven mode, only the proof structure is an output,
while the goal formula is an instantiated input. The overall operation is an iterated interplay
of both modes on increasing levels: Basically the axiom-driven mode is performed, but before
solutions for a new level are computed and cached, the goal-driven mode is invoked, at the new
level and, depending on the configuration, possibly at a number of increasingly higher levels. In
both modes, subproblems on lower levels can be solved by accessing the cache with previously
computed proof-and-lemma pairs.
    The extreme of a purely goal-driven configuration acts much like a goal-driven clausal
tableau prover with iterative deepening. A purely axiom-driven configuration just generates
lemmas, consequences, from the given axioms. The axiom-driven component in particular en-
ables heuristic restrictions based on the MGTs, the lemma components of the cache entries, e.g.,
with limiting their size, restricting the number of different proofs per MGT, or limiting the over-
all number of cache entries where some ordering based on the MGT may determine the entries
to be kept. In purely goal-driven configurations – and in goal-driven clausal tableau provers
alike – MGTs are not materialized and hence not available as basis of heuristic restrictions. For
condensed detachment problems, the blending of goal- and axiom-driven structure enumera-
tion leads to success rates that drastically improve on goal-driven clausal tableau provers and
compare to the lower end of state-of-the-art provers, while proofs are relatively short.

2
                                                                                                               Page 134

Compressed Combinatory Proof Structures, Blending Goal- with Axiom-Driven Reasoning               C. Wernhard


3     Implementation and Experiments
CD Tools includes two provers, SGCD (Structure Generating theorem proving for Condensed
Detachment) and CCS (Compressed Combinatory Structures) that roughly address Theses 2
and 1, respectively. Most experiments so far were performed on the 196 problems in TPTP 8.0.0
that are condensed detachment problems satisfying certain further constraints [27]. The TPTP
rates 189 of these lower than 1.00 and 151 with 0.00. Clausal tableau provers are known to
prove 92 of the 196 problems [27].1
    With the approach of Thesis 2, 176 problems can be proven in different configurations of
SGCD [27, 28] for level characterizations by number of tree nodes and height. The resulting
proofs are typically rather small. The set of 89 problems provable by two purely goal-driven
configurations of SGCD is, as expected, very similar to the set of 92 problems provable with
clausal tableaux. In further experiments, SGCD was configured with a novel level characteri-
zation of the full binary trees used as proof structures that was motivated by observations at
a human formal proof [29, 27]: The trees at level 0 are single nodes representing axioms. The
trees at a level n + 1 are those where the left or right child is the root of a tree at level n and
the other child is the root of a (not necessarily strict) subtree of its sibling or an arbitrary tree
at level 0. In largely axiom-driven configurations this leads to 153 proven problems, apparently
with proofs of small compacted size (size of the minimal DAG for the tree, or number of distinct
compound subterms [29, 25]), also for problems where systematic search for minimal compacted
size seems not feasible.2
    CCS , the second prover in CD Tools, performs iterative deepening on compacted size of the
proof structures and can incorporate, as suggested by Thesis 1, compressions with combinators
and proof schemas, proof structure patterns defined by combinator terms. So far it was tried
with exhaustive search, i.e., without heuristic restrictions, in purely goal-driven mode. Search
for proofs with guaranteed minimal compacted size [25] succeeds for 86 problems. For 79
problems it is, moreover, possible to obtain all proofs with minimal compacted size. To get
an idea of compression possibilities with the combinator approach and to see which particular
combinators seem useful for proofs from applications, proofs obtained by SGCD and CCS for
176 problems were first compressed into tree grammars with TreeRePair [11], an advanced tool
targeted at XML compression, and then, converted via λ-terms to combinator terms with a
method from the implementation of functional programming languages [19, Chap. 16].
    Concerning proof search with combinators, experiments were performed with configurations
characterized by sets of proof schemas, which succeeded on 88 problems, including 6 on which
the search for an “uncompressed” proof with minimal compacted size failed. Proof search with
CCS was also tried on general Horn problems, the 562 problems of TPTP specialist class
CNF_UNS_RFO_NEQ_HRN, of which 549 are rated lower than 1.00, 425 with 0.00, and around
430 are provable by clausal tableaux.3 In five configurations with sets of proof schemas, some
corresponding to specific forms of resolution, CCS – configured for goal-driven exhaustive search
with iterative deepening upon compacted size – proves 421 of these, including 67 rated between
0.25 and 0.50, with a large overlap with those provable by clausal tableaux.
Acknowledgments. Funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Re-
search Foundation) – Project-ID 457292495. The work was supported by the North-German
Supercomputing Alliance (HLRN).
    1 SETHEO 3.3 [13], S-SETHEO [10], lazyCoP 0.1 [22] and SATCoP 0.1 [21] together prove 76 problems

according to the ProblemAndSolutionStatistics document of the TPTP. leanCoP 2.1 proves 50 problems and
CMProver [26] in different configurations proves 89 problems [27].
    2 Problem LCL038-1 belongs to these. For this problem, which, upon suggestion in [20], was considered

often in ATP and whose human proofs were analyzed in [29], SGCD found a proof with compacted size 22 [27].
    3 E.g., 414 by the four provers accounted in ProblemAndSolutionStatistics that were mentioned in footnote 1.


                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                      Page 135

Compressed Combinatory Proof Structures, Blending Goal- with Axiom-Driven Reasoning       C. Wernhard


References

 [1] W. Bibel. Automated Theorem Proving. Vieweg, Braunschweig, 1982. Second edition 1987.
     doi:10.1007/978-3-322-90102-6.
 [2] W. Bibel and E. Eder. Methods and calculi for deduction. In D. M. Gabbay, C. J. Hogger,
     and J. A. Robinson, editors, Handbook of Logic in Artificial Intelligence and Logic Programming,
     volume 1, chapter 3, pages 67–182. Oxford Univ. Press, 1993.
 [3] W. Bibel and J. Otten. From Schütte’s formal systems to modern automated deduction. In
     R. Kahle and M. Rathjen, editors, The Legacy of Kurt Schütte, chapter 13, pages 215–249. Springer,
     2020. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-49424-7_13.
 [4] E. Eder. A comparison of the resolution calculus and the connection method, and a new calculus
     generalizing both methods. In E. Börger, H. Kleine Büning, and M. M. Richter, editors, CSL ’88,
     volume 385 of LNCS, pages 80–98. Springer, 1989. doi:10.1007/BFb0026296.
 [5] E. Eder. Relative Complexities of First Order Calculi. Vieweg, Braunschweig, 1992. doi:10.100
     7/978-3-322-84222-0.
 [6] M. Färber, C. Kaliszyk, and J. Urban. Machine learning guidance for connection tableaux. J.
     Autom. Reasoning, 65(2):287–320, 2021. doi:10.1007/s10817-020-09576-7.
 [7] C. Kaliszyk and J. Urban. FEMaLeCoP: Fairly efficient machine learning connection prover. In
     M. Davis, A. Fehnker, A. McIver, and A. Voronkov, editors, LPAR-20, volume 9450 of LNCS
     (LNAI), pages 88–96. Springer, 2015. doi:10.1007/978-3-662-48899-7_7.
 [8] R. Letz. Tableau and Connection Calculi. Structure, Complexity, Implementation. Habilitation-
     sschrift, TU München, 1999. Available from http://www2.tcs.ifi.lmu.de/~letz/habil.ps,
     accessed Jun 30, 2022.
 [9] R. Letz, J. Schumann, S. Bayerl, and W. Bibel. SETHEO: A high-performance theorem prover.
     J. Autom. Reasoning, 8(2):183–212, 1992. doi:10.1007/BF00244282.
[10] R. Letz and G. Stenz. Model elimination and connection tableau procedures. In A. Robinson and
     A. Voronkov, editors, Handb. of Autom. Reasoning, volume 1, pages 2015–2114. Elsevier, 2001.
[11] M. Lohrey, S. Maneth, and R. Mennicke. XML tree structure compression using RePair. Inf.
     Syst., 38(8):1150–1167, 2013. System available from https://github.com/dc0d32/TreeRePair,
     accessed Jun 30, 2022. doi:10.1016/j.is.2013.06.006.
[12] D. W. Loveland. Automated Theorem Proving: A Logical Basis. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1978.
[13] M. Moser, O. Ibens, R. Letz, J. Steinbach, C. Goller, J. Schumann, and K. Mayr. SETHEO and
     E-SETHEO – the CADE-13 systems. J. Autom. Reasoning, 18(2):237–246, 1997. doi:10.1023/A:
     1005808119103.
[14] J. Otten. Restricting backtracking in connection calculi. AI Communications, 23(2-3):159–182,
     2010. doi:10.3233/AIC-2010-0464.
[15] J. Otten. MleanCoP: A connection prover for first-order modal logic. In S. Demri, D. Kapur, and
     C. Weidenbach, editors, IJCAR 2014, volume 8562 of LNCS (LNAI), pages 269–276. Springer,
     2014. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-08587-6_20.
[16] J. Otten. Non-clausal connection-based theorem proving in intuitionistic first-order logic. In
     C. Benzmüller and J. Otten, editors, ARQNL 2016, volume 1770 of CEUR Workshop Proc., pages
     9–20. CEUR-WS.org, 2016. URL: http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1770/paper1.pdf.
[17] J. Otten. The nanoCoP 2.0 connection provers for classical, intuitionistic and modal logics. In
     A. Das and S. Negri, editors, TABLEAUX 2021, volume 12842 of LNCS (LNAI), pages 236–249.
     Springer, 2021. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-86059-2_14.
[18] J. Otten and W. Bibel. leanCoP: lean connection-based theorem proving. J. Symb. Comput.,
     36(1-2):139–161, 2003. doi:10.1016/S0747-7171(03)00037-3.
[19] S. L. Peyton Jones. The Implementation of Functional Programming Languages. Prentice Hall,
     1987.

4
                                                                                                       Page 136

Compressed Combinatory Proof Structures, Blending Goal- with Axiom-Driven Reasoning        C. Wernhard


[20] F. Pfenning. Single axioms in the implicational propositional calculus. In E. Lusk and R. Overbeek,
     editors, CADE-9, volume 310 of LNCS (LNAI), pages 710–713. Springer, 1988. doi:10.1007/BF
     b0012869.
[21] M. Rawson and G. Reger. Eliminating models during model elimination. In A. Das and S. Negri,
     editors, TABLEAUX 2021, volume 12842 of LNCS (LNAI), pages 250–265. Springer, 2021. doi:
     10.1007/978-3-030-86059-2_15.
[22] M. Rawson and G. Reger. lazyCoP: Lazy paramodulation meets neurally guided search. In A. Das
     and S. Negri, editors, TABLEAUX 2021, volume 12842 of LNCS (LNAI), pages 187–199. Springer,
     2021. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-86059-2_11.
[23] M. Schönfinkel. Über die Bausteine der mathematischen Logik. Math. Ann., 92(3–4):305–316,
     1924. doi:10.1007/BF01448013.
[24] D. Ulrich. A legacy recalled and a tradition continued. J. Autom. Reasoning, 27(2):97–122, 2001.
     doi:10.1023/A:1010683508225.
[25] R. Veroff. Finding shortest proofs: An application of linked inference rules. J. Autom. Reasoning,
     27(2):123–139, 2001. doi:10.1023/A:1010635625063.
[26] C. Wernhard. The PIE system for proving, interpolating and eliminating. In P. Fontaine, S. Schulz,
     and J. Urban, editors, PAAR 2016, volume 1635 of CEUR Workshop Proc., pages 125–138. CEUR-
     WS.org, 2016. URL: http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1635/paper-11.pdf.
[27] C. Wernhard. CD Tools – Condensed detachment and structure generating theorem proving
     (system description). https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.08453, 2022. doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2207.08
     453.
[28] C. Wernhard. Generating compressed combinatory proof structures – an approach to automated
     first-order theorem proving. In B. Konev, C. Schon, and A. Steen, editors, PAAR 2022, volume
     3201 of CEUR Workshop Proc. CEUR-WS.org, 2022. Preprint: http://cs.christophwernhard
     .com/papers/css.pdf.
[29] C. Wernhard and W. Bibel. Learning from Łukasiewicz and Meredith: Investigations into proof
     structures. In A. Platzer and G. Sutcliffe, editors, CADE 28, volume 12699 of LNCS (LNAI),
     pages 58–75. Springer, 2021. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-79876-5_4.
[30] S. Wolfram. Combinators – A Centennial View. Wolfram Media Inc, 2021. Accompanying webpage:
     https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2020/12/combinators-a-centennial-view/, accessed
     Jun 30, 2022.
[31] Z. Zombori, J. Urban, and C. E. Brown. Prolog technology reinforcement learning prover (system
     description). In N. Peltier and V. Sofronie-Stokkermans, editors, IJCAR 2020, volume 12167 of
     LNCS (LNAI), pages 489–507. Springer, 2020. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-51054-1_33.
[32] Z. Zombori, J. Urban, and M. Olsák. The role of entropy in guiding a connection prover. In
     A. Das and S. Negri, editors, TABLEAUX 2021, volume 12842 of LNCS (LNAI), pages 218–235.
     Springer, 2021. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-86059-2_13.




                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                 Page 137




          Autoformalization for Neural Theorem Proving
    Yuhuai Wu1 , Albert Jiang2 , Wenda Li2 , Markus N. Rabe1 , Charles Staats1 ,
                    Mateja Jamnik2 , and Christian Szegedy1
                                          1
                                           Google Research
                                    2
                                        University of Cambridge




1     Introduction
In this work, we demonstrate the feasibility and usefulness of autoformalization in the context
of the newly introduced MiniF2F [10] benchmark. We use large language models to translate
several thousands of informal problems into Isabelle and use them to improve our neural theorem
prover. We find that transformer-based [7] language models trained on a large amount of web
data are capable of formalizing mathematical competition problem statements with a relatively
high success rate and the resulting statements can be used for creating new correct proofs that
can be used for fine-tuning a neural theorem prover for improved proof automation. Using this
methodology, we achieve a new state of the art on the MiniF2F benchmark.




2     Autoformalization using Large Language Models
Inspired by the success of large language models (LLMs) for synthesizing computer code by co-
training on both natural language and code on web-scale data, we explore the capabilities of large
language models (LLMs) that were trained on a large amount web data to turn natural language
mathematics into formalized theorems (Isabelle theorems in this case). This is essentially a
machine translation task [8] in which the input language is English and output language is
formal code used by the interactive proof assistant Isabelle [9].
   In particular, we exploit the impressive few-shot capability of LLMs by providing a few
examples of the translations which improves the quality of our translation. We ran our initial
experiments with using Codex and prompted the language model for the task of formalizing
the informal statements. Here are two examples of automatically formalized theorems, with
prompts provided in the Appendix.

    Natural language version: ”Prove that there is no function f from the set of non-negative
    integers into itself such that f (f (n)) = n + 1987 for every n.” Translate the natural
    language version to an Isabelle version:
    theorem
      fixes f :: "nat ⇒ nat"
      assumes " ∀ n. f (f n) = n + 1987"
      shows False
                                                                                                      Page 138

Autoformalization for Neural Theorem Proving                       Wu, Jiang, Li, Rabe, Staats, Szegedy



    Natural Language version: ”When all the girls at Madeline’s school line up in rows of
    eight, there are seven left over. If instead they line up in rows of four, how many are left
    over? The final answer is 3.”
    Translate the natural language version to an Isabelle version:

    theorem
      fixes n::nat
      assumes "n mod 8 = 7"
      shows "n mod 4 = 3"


    Remarkably, we see in both examples, Codex was able to translate the natural language
statement into Isabelle formal theorems perfectly. In the first example, the model can understand
what it means by the phrase “to itself”, and correctly formalize the domain of function:
f :: ”nat ⇒ nat”. The second example is even more remarkable. First of all, a formal translation
of a grade school math problem should not ever exist in the pre-training corpus, as this type of
mathematics is not of interest to formal mathematicians. Second, the examples in the prompt
we provide also are not of this type of problem. It is hence remarkable that the model is capable
of extrapolating to this type of statement – a true extrapolation. This shows a great promise of
using LLMs for doing auto-formalization.


3      Autoformalization Improves Neural Theorem Proving
To study the usefulness of the formalized statements, we explore if one can improve neural
theorem provers by training the model on automatically translated theorems. In particular, we
study auto-formalization on a constrained setting – mathematical competition problems, where
it has little requirement in formalizing the definitions and background theory.
    For our neural theorem prover, we use a recently introduced theorem prover LISA [4] that
proves Isabelle theorems by language modeling the best action conditioned on the current proof
state. The input of the transformer-based neural network is the proof state and the output
is the tactic application to be applied. This network is trained on existing human proofs. At
inference time, a best-first search is performed using the neural network as an action generator.


                           Table 1: Proof rates on MiniF2F Benchmark
                                  Model          valid   test
                                   PACT [2]      23.9%     24.6%
                                   FMSCL [5]     33.6%     29.6%
                                   LISA [4]      28.3%     29.9%
                                   LISA + AF     36.1%     34.0%

    We use Codex [1] auto-formalize 3908 mathematical problems belonging to category algebra,
intermediate algebra, and number theory from the training set of MATH [3]. Out of them,
3363 of the auto-formalized theorems are syntactically correct. We then use our neural prover
trained on Isabelle corpus (AFP and Isabelle Standard library) to prove these theorems, and
23.3% of them can be proven. This gives us 782 new provably verified theorems along with their
proofs for us to train our neural prover further. This form of training on one’s own generated
data is known as expert iteration, and was already used in prior works [6, 5]. However, unlike in

2
                                                                                                     Page 139

Autoformalization for Neural Theorem Proving                      Wu, Jiang, Li, Rabe, Staats, Szegedy


Polu et. al. [5], where one perform expert iteration on a set of problems manually translated by
human, we here use LLMs to auto-formalize the theorems.
   After one epoch of training on the proofs of 782 theorems, we evaluated the neural prover
on miniF2F [10], a recently introduced benchmark containing 488 mathematical competition
statements manually formalized by humans. Some of those problems come from the valid
and test set of MATH, and others come from previous International Mathematical Olympiad
competitions or AoPS1 .
   The results are shown in Table 1. LISA refers to the model before we trained on the
autoformalized dataset, and LISA + AF refers to the model after one epoch of training on
the 782 theorems. We see that by simply training on one epoch of the proved auto-formalized
theorems, we can achieve a significant improvement in proof rate (from 28.3% to 36.1% on
miniF2F-valid), and a new state-of-the-art performance on this benchmark.


4     Conclusion
For the first time, we have demonstrated that autoformalization is indeed feasible at least
for high school mathematics competition problems and the translated results are useful for
improving the performance of neural theorem provers.
    However, our method is not capable of creating whole theories or autoformalization of
facts that need to rely on libraries the language model has not been trained on. Full blown
autoformalization of mathematical text will require new methods, especially proper training
methodologies and utilizing newly introduced code by retrieval augmented language modeling.


References
 [1] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
     Kaplan, Harrison Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
     Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
     Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
     Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert,
     Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex
     Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders,
     Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Joshua Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa,
     Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob
     McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating
     large language models trained on code. CoRR, abs/2107.03374, 2021.
 [2] Jesse Michael Han, Jason Rute, Yuhuai Wu, Edward Ayers, and Stanislas Polu. Proof artifact
     co-training for theorem proving with language models. In International Conference on Learning
     Representations, 2022.
 [3] Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn
     Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the MATH dataset.
     CoRR, abs/2103.03874, 2021.
 [4] Albert Qiaochu Jiang, Wenda Li, Jesse Michael Han, and Yuhuai Wu. Lisa: Language models of
     isabelle proofs. 6th Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Theorem Proving, 2021.
 [5] Stanislas Polu, Jesse Michael Han, Kunhao Zheng, Mantas Baksys, Igor Babuschkin, and Ilya
     Sutskever. Formal mathematics statement curriculum learning, 2022.


    1 https://artofproblemsolving.com/



                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                       Page 140

Autoformalization for Neural Theorem Proving                        Wu, Jiang, Li, Rabe, Staats, Szegedy


 [6] Stanislas Polu and Ilya Sutskever. Generative language modeling for automated theorem proving.
     CoRR, abs/2009.03393, 2020.
 [7] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
     Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NeurIPS, 2017.
 [8] Qingxiang Wang, Chad Brown, Cezary Kaliszyk, and Josef Urban. Exploration of neural machine
     translation in autoformalization of mathematics in mizar. In International Conference on Certified
     Programs and Proofs, 2020.
 [9] Makarius Wenzel, Lawrence C. Paulson, and Tobias Nipkow. The Isabelle framework. In Otmane Aı̈t
     Mohamed, César A. Muñoz, and Sofiène Tahar, editors, Theorem Proving in Higher Order Logics,
     21st International Conference, TPHOLs 2008, Montreal, Canada, August 18-21, 2008. Proceedings,
     volume 5170 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 33–38. Springer, 2008.
[10] Kunhao Zheng, Jesse Michael Han, and Stanislas Polu. Minif2f: a cross-system benchmark for
     formal olympiad-level mathematics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.00110, 2021.


A      Prompt

                                                             i2
                                                    P1               P1
    Natural language version: “Let z = 1+i
                                         √ , find (
                                           2          i=1 2(z )) · (
                                                                              1
                                                                      i=1 2( z i2 )). The final
    answer is 36.”
    Translate the natural language version to an Isabelle version:

    theorem
      fixes z::complex
      assumes P h0: "z = (Complex (1/sqrt 2) (1/sqrt 2))"
      shows "( k::nat=1..12.
                    P           (z^(k^2)))
                 * (   k::nat=1..12. 1/(z^(k^2))) =36"

    Natural language version: “Determine the value of ab if log8 a + log4 b2 = 5 and log8 b +
    log4 a2 = 7. The final answer is 512”. Translate the natural language version to an
    Isabelle version:
    theorem
      fixes a b ::real
      assumes "(ln a) / (ln 8) + (ln (b^2)) / (ln 4) = 5"
               "(ln b) / (ln 8) + (ln (a^2)) / (ln 4) = 7"
      shows "a * b = 512"




4
                                                                                                         Page 141




Tactic Characterizations by the Influences on Proof States ∗
                            Liao Zhang1,3 and Lasse Blaauwbroek2
                        1
                            Czech Technical University, Prague, Czech Republic
                            2
                             Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques, France
                                   3
                                     University of Innsbruck, Austria



1     Introduction
When formalizing mathematics in an interactive theorem prover, such as the Coq [1] proof
assistant, it is necessary to have an intuition on how the available proof actions change the
proof state. In particular users may have an idea that to transform the current proof state to
a different one, a particular tactic might be the right one to use.
    In this paper, we regard the changes to a proof state made by the tactic application as the
semantic of that tactic. The purpose of our study is to predict the tactic based on its semantic.
Assume there is a triple (ps, t, {ps′ }1..n ), where ps, t, {ps′ }1..n are a Coq state, the tactic applied
to ps by a Coq user, and the after states caused by the tactic application, respectively. We aim
at building a machine learning model to predict a tactic t′ such that ps transforms to {ps′ }1..n
by the application of t′ . To ensure that t and t′ lead to the same after states, we run t′ in Coq
and compare with t.
    There are several motivations behind our project. First, the task can be directly applied for
tactic suggestion given a human’s intuition for the next state. For a Coq beginner, it is quite
common that he can imagine the next state but cannot determine how to select a suitable tactic
to reach the goal. However, understanding Coq’s manual may be challenging for beginners. If he
can copy the before state from the Coq editor, convert it to the imaginary after state, and input
them into our system, we will be able to automatically suggest the tactics with the expected
behavior. Meanwhile, a medium-level Coq programmer may want to discover a single tactic to
substitute an awkward tactic sequence. Even for an expert, when he encounters an unfamiliar
domain, he needs our system to advise likely helpful tactics.
    Second, the task serves as an initial step to a new formal verification strategy. When
a mathematician tries to prove a theorem, he first thinks of several intermediate goals and
then fills the gaps by order. However, nowadays proof assistants cannot skip tactics between
intermediate goals. We can extend our system to predict a tactic sequence from one state
to another. Afterwards, the human expert can merely specify the states that he thinks are
important to complete the proof and ask our system to erase the gaps.
    Finally, since we encounter our own challenges in precisely characterizing the transition
between before and after states, the approaches developed by us can also be applied to other
machine learning domains. Take fault detection [3] for instance, we can apply our differential
techniques to the images before and after the fault occurs. Then, the results can be input into
a learning model to predict the category of fault.




  ∗ This work was supported by the ERC grant no. 714034 SMART and by the European Regional Development

Fund under the project AI&Reasoning (reg. no. CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15 003/0000466).
                                                                                                    Page 142

Tactic Characterizations by the Influences on Proof States                    Zhang and Blaauwbroek


2     Tactic Characterizations
We characterize the semantic of tactics as features and Coq strings as the input for random
forests [7] and GPT-2 [5], respectively. The feature extraction techniques on Coq terms are
the same as our previous work [7]. Large-scale pretrained transformers such as GPT-2 have
achieved significant progress in various domains [2]. We evaluate GPT-2 and random forests to
make a comparison.
    We consider three feature extraction approaches. The first approach computes the differ-
ences between the state features of ps and {ps′ }1..n . From ps, we extract a set of features F .
We also extract n sets of features {F }1..n from {ps′ }1..n . If a feature f exists in F but does not
in any Fi , we regard it as a disappeared feature. Conversely, if there is an Fi with a feature f
that is not in F , then f is an appearing feature. The tactic characterization is the union of all
disappeared and appearing features.
    Second, we extract features from the newly defined existential variables in proof terms. In
Coq, we write tactics to construct a proof script to prove a theorem. Actually, the tactics help
to complete a proof term. The relationship between proofs and proof terms is based on the
Curry-Howard correspondence [6]. An incomplete proof term may contain several existential
variables. Some are defined, and others are undefined as holes. A tactic fills some holes with
Coq terms and may generate several new holes. A proof term is completed once all the holes
have been filled. We obtain the features from the terms defined in the holes by the tactic as its
characterization.
    Finally, we perform first-order anti-unification [4] on the before and after states to find
the substitutions. A term g of two terms t1 and t2 is called a generalization if there are
substitutions σ1 and σ2 such that σ1 g = t1 and σ2 g = t2 . Anti-unification aims to find the
least general generalization lgg such that for any generalization g ′ of t1 and t2 , there exists a
substitution σ that makes σg ′ = lgg. We extract the features from the Coq terms present in
the substitutions(σ1 and σ2 ) and the lgg as the input to our model.
    For GPT-2, we merely apply anti-unification to generate strings. We convert the lgg and
substitutions to strings and input them into the model.


3     Experimental Evaluation
Our dataset is composed of the proof states (158, 494) of all the lemmas (11, 372) in the Coq’s
standard library. The lemmas were randomly divided into three subsets for training, validation,
and testing in an 80-10-10 ratio. Each subset includes the states of the corresponding lemmas.
For random forests, we optimize parameters on the training and validation partitions, which
is depicted in Figure 1. Afterwards, we build models with the best hyper-parameters learned
from the training dataset and make predictions for the test dataset. We also fine-tune the
smallest GPT-2 for each characterization. Every model is executed for 25 epochs, and we store
the snapshot with the best accuracy on the validation dataset to synthesize tactics for the test
data. All the GPT models utilize the same parameters: a batch size of 32, no weight decay,
and the learning rate of 0.0003 with a linear schedule and the first 20% steps for warming up.
Figure 2 depicts the average training loss per step and validation accuracy during fine-tuning.
    Table 1 shows the results on the test data. Unsurprisingly, only learning from before states
performs worst since it contains little information of the influences of the tactic. The best
accuracy achieved by GPT-2 is 10.47% better than that of random forests. This confirms the
power of the state-of-the-art neural network. Anti-unification does not work well for random

2
                                                                                                                                                      Page 143

Tactic Characterizations by the Influences on Proof States                                                                Zhang and Blaauwbroek



Figure 1: Results of hyper-parameter tuning for random forests. The accuracy denotes how
often we predict a tactic that is the same as the tactic in the dataset.

                50                                                                    50




 accuracy(%)
                45                                                                    40

                                                                                      30
                40
                                                                                      20
                      0.01 0.02 0.04 0.08 0.16 0.32 0.64                                         20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
                                         impurity                                                         tree number
                            before                   before after                           feature difference                     anti-unify



                              Figure 2: Training loss and validation accuracy of GPT-2.

         1.2                                               anti unify                            anti unify
                                                           before                     0.6        before
                                                           before after                          before after
         1.0
                                                                                      0.5
         0.8

loss     0.6                                                               accuracy   0.4

         0.4                                                                          0.3

         0.2
                                                                                      0.2
               0        5         10            15        20          25                     0           5      10            15        20       25
                                       epochs                                                                        epochs

                            (a) training loss                                                          (b) validation accuracy



Table 1: Results on the test dataset. “Same tactic” denotes that the prediction is exactly the
same as the tactic in the library. “Same change” checks how often the prediction makes the
same transformation.

                                                                            before                 feature       proof                anti
                     model             accuracy(%)             before
                                                                             after                difference      term             unification
                                        same tactic            36.917       44.563                 49.723        47.480              47.727
               random forests
                                       same change             43.225       52.166                 59.344        56.024              55.507
                                        same tactic            39.154       56.215                                                   60.300
                     GPT-2
                                       same change             45.356       65.319                                                   69.814




                                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                     Page 144

Tactic Characterizations by the Influences on Proof States                     Zhang and Blaauwbroek


forests but obtains excellent performance for GPT-2. The reason may be that converting anti-
unification to appropriate features is challenging.


References
[1] Bruno Barras, Samuel Boutin, Cristina Cornes, Judicaël Courant, Yann Coscoy, David Delahaye,
    Daniel de Rauglaudre, Jean-Christophe Filliâtre, Eduardo Giménez, Hugo Herbelin, et al. The coq
    proof assistant reference manual. INRIA, version, 6(11), 1999.
[2] Xu Han, Zhengyan Zhang, Ning Ding, Yuxian Gu, Xiao Liu, Yuqi Huo, Jiezhong Qiu, Yuan Yao,
    Ao Zhang, Liang Zhang, et al. Pre-trained models: Past, present and future. AI Open, 2:225–250,
    2021.
[3] Dubravko Miljković. Fault detection methods: A literature survey. In 2011 Proceedings of the 34th
    international convention MIPRO, pages 750–755. IEEE, 2011.
[4] Gordon D Plotkin. A note on inductive generalization. Machine intelligence, 5:153–163, 1970.
[5] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
    models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
[6] Morten Heine Sørensen and Pawel Urzyczyn. Lectures on the Curry-Howard isomorphism. Elsevier,
    2006.
[7] Liao Zhang, Lasse Blaauwbroek, Bartosz Piotrowski, Prokop Černỳ, Cezary Kaliszyk, and Josef
    Urban. Online machine learning techniques for coq: A comparison. In International Conference on
    Intelligent Computer Mathematics, pages 67–83. Springer, 2021.




4
