                                               Graph Sequence Learning for Premise Selection

                                                                Edvard K. Holden and Konstantin Korovin

                                                                         The University of Manchester




arXiv:2303.15642v1 [cs.LO] 27 Mar 2023
                                                Abstract. Premise selection is crucial for large theory reasoning as the sheer
                                                size of the problems quickly leads to resource starvation. This paper proposes a
                                                premise selection approach inspired by the domain of image captioning, where
                                                language models automatically generate a suitable caption for a given image.
                                                Likewise, we attempt to generate the sequence of axioms required to construct
                                                the proof of a given problem. This is achieved by combining a pre-trained graph
                                                neural network with a language model. We evaluated different configurations of
                                                our method and experience a 17.7% improvement gain over the baseline.

                                                Keywords: Automated Theorem Proving · Machine Learning · Premise Selec-
                                                tion · Sequence Learning · Graph Neural Network


                                         1   Introduction
                                         Automated Theorem Provers (ATPs) construct formal proofs without human interaction
                                         and have seen great success in hardware and software verification, as it automatically
                                         verifies system properties. They have also played a significant role in formalisation
                                         projects such as Mizar [31] and as hammers in interactive theorem proving [20, 28].
                                             State-of-the-art ATPs such as iProver [5, 15], E [27], Vampire [16] and SPASS [33]
                                         attempts to solve problems consisting of a conjecture and a set of axioms through sat-
                                         uration. This process consists of clausifying the input problem and computing all pos-
                                         sible inferences between the clauses until it derives a contradiction or the set of clauses
                                         is saturated. However, computing inferences quickly lead to a combinatorial explosion
                                         in the number of clauses which exhausts the computational resources. Therefore, the
                                         proof search is guided by heuristics. This is essential because the chance of deriving a
                                         contradiction reduces considerably as the number of clauses grows. Machine learning
                                         is currently being used to discover efficient heuristics [11, 12, 26], and to intelligently
                                         operate internal heuristic components [4, 6, 8, 25].
                                             However, strong heuristics are insufficient when reasoning over large theories. Prob-
                                         lems concerning verification and mathematical statements often contain a vast amount
                                         of axioms, quickly resulting in resource starvation due to the sheer size of the initial
                                         space. A key observation is that, despite the large set of axioms, only a fraction is
                                         typically required to construct the proof. Consequently, by removing all “superfluous”
                                         axioms, the problems become computationally feasible, and the chance of finding proof
                                         increases dramatically. This task is known as premise selection.
                                             This paper explores the adaptation of image captioning to the premise selection task.
                                         Image captioning models aim to produce a sentence in natural language that describes
                                         a given image. The captions are generated by embedding images using a pre-trained
2         Holden & Korovin

image model and combining the embedding with a language model. Such methods are
novel for premise selection and hold multiple compelling properties. First, the axioms
are represented by tokens, and their embeddings are learnt during training. With an ab-
stract token representation of the axioms, we can leverage both the conjecture-axiom
and the inter-axiom relationship. This is in contrast to approaches that accentuate the
structural and symbol similarity of conjecture-axiom pairs. A vital property of the lan-
guage model is encapsulating sequences of axioms as opposed to treating them sepa-
rately. By representing the axioms occurring in a proof as a sorted set, the model can
learn the conditional relationship between the axioms occurring in a proof. This is cru-
cial for treating the axioms as a collective set.
     Another challenging aspect of a captioning approach is computing problem em-
bedding entailing problem semantics. First-order problems consist of a set of tree-
structured formulas which are not easily represented through a feature vector, as re-
quired for machine learning. This paper investigates pre-trained graph neural networks
(GNNs) to embed problems via transfer learning. GNNs operate on graphs and can in-
corporate structural properties into the embedding. Nevertheless, there is no apparent
pre-training task for FOF problems as there is for, e.g. images. Therefore, we investigate
using a supervised pre-training step where the GNN learns the embedding by training
on the premise selection problem in the binary setting. Additionally, we experiment
using an unsupervised approach that learns to embed the problems based on graph sim-
ilarity. The graph embeddings are further enhanced by emphasising different sections of
the embedding at given steps of axiom generation by exploring attention mechanisms.
     Due to the challenges of premise selection, a single approach is unlikely to encapsu-
late all productive aspects of the axiom-conjecture relationship. Hence, we also explore
the combination of our method and SInE [10].
     Our main contributions are:


    – Adapt approaches from image captioning to the task of premise selection.
    – Novel method for combining graphs with sequence learning in the context of premise
      selection, outperforming previous tokenised conjecture approaches.
    – Novel method for unsupervised training of GNNs embeddings of FOF problems.
    – Usage of GNNs on problem graphs for transfer learning.
    – ’Rare Axiom’ inclusion technique for training with a reduced vocabulary while
      maintaining rare positive axioms.

    We evaluated our approach over an extended version of the DeepMath dataset. The
results show that the specificity of our approach, in combination with the breadth of
SInE, significantly outperforms related methods and results in a 17.7% increase in the
number of solved problems over the baseline.
    This paper is structured as follows: in Section 2 we present the related works. In
Section 3 we present the sequence model and in Section 4 we describe our approach for
obtaining problem embeddings. In Section 5, we evaluate our approach experimentally
both offline and online, before concluding the paper in Section 6.
                                    Graph Sequence Learning for Premise Selection       3

2   Related Works

Premise selection has previously been addressed with heuristic-based methods such
as MePo [19] and the very successful SInE [10] algorithm. The core idea of SInE is
that axioms are likely to contribute towards the proof if they contain symbols related
to the symbols in the conjecture. This is achieved by iteratively selecting axioms with
symbols occurring in a set of selected axioms relative to how often the symbol appears
globally. The main limitation of the approach is a low specificity and not utilising any
information from existing proofs.
     The task of premise selection has also been approached with machine learning
methods such as Naive Bayes [31], kernel methods [1], K-NN [13] and binary clas-
sification [2, 17, 21, 24]. In the binary setting, the goal is to train a supervised model
to score conjecture-axiom pairs. A significant drawback of this method is that axioms
are considered independent, and the problem sizes strongly skew predictions. Instead,
axioms should be treated as a collective entity, as all the axioms occurring in a proof
must be selected to construct the proof.
     The approaches most similar to our method are the sequence-to-sequence approach
in [22] and its extension with a Transformer model [23]. The sequence models treat
the conjecture as a sequence of tokens and map it to a sequence of axioms. Their main
limitation is being unaware of how the conjecture relates to elements of the various
axioms. GNNs can model the relationship between formulae elements, as shown by the
binary graph classification approach in [24]. Meanwhile, our approach is aware of the
relationship between the axioms occurring in the proof and the conjecture’s connection
to these axioms.


3   Axiom Captioning

The image captioning problem can be stated as follows: given an image I and a dic-
tionary of words Ω, generate an accurate and grammatical caption S, consisting of
words from Ω. This challenging problem goes beyond the already non-trivial task of
identifying the image objects. Rather, it requires identifying and comprehending: the
objects, their attributes and their relation. Moreover, this information must be decoded
and represented as a grammatically correct sentence in the target language.
    State-of-the-art image captioning approaches join the machine learning fields of im-
age classification and language modelling. An example of a captioning model based on
the inject architecture is shown in Figure 1. It consists of three components: an image
encoder, a language model, and a dense output layer. The image encoder extracts and
embeds the image semantics as a feature vector. The language model combines these
salient features with an input word to produce an encoding of the current sequence.
Finally, the dense layer maps the encoding to a probability distribution over the vocab-
ulary.
    Despite the challenges of image captioning, the models produce appropriate and
detailed image descriptions. Due to their expressiveness, we believe these methods can
be utilised for premise selection. In the remaining parts of this section, we describe the
sequence model.
4       Holden & Korovin




                    Fig. 1. The inject architecture for image captioning.



3.1   Sequence Learning

In the original task of image captioning, the model operates on pairs of images and
captions in a target language. In the context of premise selection, the images are re-
placed by problems and the captions are replaced with the axioms that appear in the
proof of the problems. Assume we have a problem I with a corresponding proof S ∗
and an axiom resource bank Ω. Next, we extract and impose an order on the m axioms
in S ∗ , resulting in S = hs1 , . . . , sm i, si ∈ Ω for 1 ≤ i ≤ m. We describe the task
of premise selection in the context of sequence learning as maximising the probability
of producing the sequence of axioms used in the proof of a given problem. Given the
problem-axioms pair (I, S) we can compute its log probability as:

                                       m
                                       X
                      log p(S|I) =           log p(st |st−1 , . . . , s1 , I).
                                       t=1

   We estimate log p(st |st−1 , · · · , s1 , I) with the recurrent neural network (RNN) σ
with learnable parameters θ. RNNs exhibit a dynamic behaviour over a sequence of
inputs due to their internal memory state ht , which captures the previous inputs se-
quentially. In particular, the output at step t depends on the previous memory state ht−1
and the input st−1 . The hidden state is defined as:
                                
                                              σ(I; θ) if t = 1,
                         ht =
                                    σ(ht−1 , st−1 ; θ) otherwise.

    The RNN is trained to predict the next token in a sequence based on the previ-
ous token and the current memory state. Over a training set of problem-axiom pairs
{(I i , S i )}N
              i=1 , the model is trained to maximise the log probability of producing the
correct sequence of axioms:
                                               X
                            θ∗ = arg max              log p(S|I; θ).
                                        θ       I,S


    Thus, the model predicts axioms based on the problem and the previously predicted
axioms. In our implementation, we use Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) [9] cells
as the underlying RNN. LSTM is among the most popular RNN models due to its
robustness towards vanishing and exploding gradients.
                                         Graph Sequence Learning for Premise Selection        5

3.2    Axiom Captioning

The generative axiom prediction model is constructed using the par-inject architecture
[30], as illustrated in Figure 2. This architecture takes a token embedding s and a prob-
lem embedding I at each time step. The model is given the special start token sstart to
initialise the axiom generation process. Likewise, a special end token, send , represents
the end of a sequence. Consequently, start and end tokens are added to each axiom se-
quence such that the model is trained on the target sequence hsstart , s1 , . . . , sm , send i.
Axioms with few occurrences in the dataset are replaced by the Out-Of-Vocabulary
token sunkown . These three special tokens are included in the dictionary Ω.




            Fig. 2. Recurrent Neural Network predicting the next token in a sequence.


    At training time, we apply teacher forcing., which feeds the next token of the train-
ing sequence to the model instead of its previous prediction. This prevents the model
from being unable to recover from poor predictions. Hence, the prediction at each train-
ing step is expressed as:
                                  
                                       σ(sstart , h0 , I; θ) if t = 1,
                          yˆt =
                                      σ(st−1 , ht−1 , I; θ) otherwise.

      Where yˆt is a probability distribution at time t over the axioms in Ω.


3.3    Neural Attention Captioning

The captioning decoder is fed a static input entity at each time step, but it can be ad-
vantageous to emphasise different parts of the embedding based on the current model
state [35]. This is achieved through a separate attention network that dynamically weighs
some input according to a model state. In other settings, the attention mechanism can
emphasise particular words in a sequence or regions of an image with respect to the
model state. In this scenario, the incentive of attention is to emphasise particular sec-
tions and elements of the averaged graph representation to enhance the embedding.
    The attention mechanism computes a context vector which is used as input to the
next stage of the model. It is a weighted sum of the n embedding elements where each
weight is the quantity of attention applied to the corresponding element:
6       Holden & Korovin


                                           n
                                           X
                                    ct =         αt,i Ii .
                                           i=1
    The weights αt,i are computed based on an alignment score function which mea-
sures how well each element matches the current state. The scores are scaled by soft-
max into weights in the range of [0, 1] where the sum of the weights equals to 1:


                   exp(score(Ii , ht ))
          αt,i = Pn                        .
                  j=1 exp(score(Ij , ht ))

    In Section 5.4, we experimented with both Loung
attention [18] and Bahdanau attention [3]. The align-
ment function of all three attention types is shown in
Table 1, where W, W1 , W2 and V are learnable at-
tention parameters. In the Bahdanau style, the context
vector is concatenated with the token embedding and
fed to the RNN decoder, as illustrated by Figure 3.
This is a key difference from the Loung style, where
the alignment scores are computed on the output of the Fig. 3. Language model with Bah-
RNN prior to the dense layer.                          danau attention.


            Attention Style                 Alignment
            Bahdanau       score(Ii , ht−1 ) = V > · tanh(W1 · Ii + W2 · ht−1 )
            Loung Dot      score(Ii , ht ) = h> t · Ii
            Loung Concat score(Ii , ht ) = V > · tanh(W [Ii ; ht ])
                   Table 1. Overview of attention alignment functions.




4   Problem Embeddings
An embedding is a fixed-size, real-valued vector representation of an entity, where se-
mantically similar entities ideally are close in the embedding space. In the original
task of image captioning, image embeddings consist of low-level image features ob-
tained from pre-trained convolutional neural networks over extensive image classifica-
tion datasets.
    Computing problem embeddings in a similar fashion pose multiple challenges in
the context of first-order problems. Firstly, the problems have no natural fixed-size vec-
tor representation as they consist of unordered sets of tree-structured formulae. Thus,
encoding syntactic, structural and semantic properties as a vector is non-trivial. Sec-
ondly, there is no immediate classification task for learning the semantics of first-order
problems. This paper attempts to overcome these challenges by producing embeddings
via graph neural networks.
                                     Graph Sequence Learning for Premise Selection       7

4.1   Problem Graph
A first-order logic formula has an intrinsic tree-shaped structure and is naturally repre-
sented as a directed acyclic graph G with vertices V and edges E. The vertices, also
known as nodes, correspond to the types of elements occurring in the formula, such as
function symbols and constants. The edges denote a relationship between the vertices,
e.g., an argument supplied to a function. Figure 4 illustrates the graph representation of
a conjecture, spanning four different node types as visually represented by the colour-
ing.
    This representation extends to sets of formulas by computing a global graph over
the node elements in the formulae, as shown in Figure 5. The graph representation
captures many aspects of the formulae while invariant to symbol renaming and encoding
problems with previously unseen symbols. This paper uses a graph encoding of 17 node
types as described in [24].




                                                  Fig. 5. A problem graph of one conjecture
       Fig. 4. A conjecture graph.
                                                  and six axioms.




4.2   Graph Neural Networks
The problem graph is embedded into an n-dimensional embedding space via a graph
neural network. A graph neural network is an optimisable transformation that operates
on the attributes of a graph. It utilises a “graph-in, graph-out” methodology where it
embeds the graph while preserving the structure and connectivity of the original graph.
    A randomly initialised vector represents each node type Φ across all graphs in an
n-dimensional embedding space. Next, each node in a graph is assigned to its cor-
responding embedding vector xΦ , resulting in the node feature matrix X. The GNN
embeds the type features of each node xΦ into the node feature embedding x0Φ through
a node update function. This effectively transforms the graph features X into a more
favourable embedding X 0 . Adjacent nodes are incorporated into the update of a node to
encode the structure through message passing [7].
8       Holden & Korovin

    Message passing is accomplished through graph convolutional layers, and we utilise
the operation described in [14]. The node-wise convolutional operation for the attributes
  (k)
xi of node i at step k is described as:
                                                   e
                            (k)
                                                  q j,i xk−1
                                         X
                          xi = W                            j
                                             S
                                      j∈N (i) {i}   dˆj dˆi
    where W is a learnable weight matrix, N (i) is the set of neighbouring nodes of i
and dˆi = 1 + j∈N (i) ej,i . The variable ej,i denotes the edge weight from j to i. In this
               P
setting, all edge weights are 1. The convolutional operations are applied synchronously
to all nodes in the graph and learn hidden layer representations that encode both local
graph structure and nodes features.




         Fig. 6. Graph Neural Network for classification of graph or node properties.


    After computing the graph embeddings, they are pooled and passed through the
prediction layer, which produces the final model output. We experiment with three dif-
ferent mean pooling approaches all nodes in the graph, only axiom nodes, and only the
conjecture node. An overview of the GNN pipeline is shown in Figure 6.
    In this approach, the GNN is pre-trained on auxiliary tasks, computing the embed-
dings before training the captioning model. We experiment with supervised and unsu-
pervised pre-training GNN approaches, as described below.

4.3   Supervised Problem Embedding
In the supervised approach, the GNN is trained on the node level by performing binary
premise selection over the axiom nodes, as described in [24]. Based on their node em-
bedding, the model learns to predict whether an axiom occurs in the proof of a problem.
During training, the resulting axiom node embeddings become increasingly valuable for
modelling their contribution towards the proof. Therefore, the node embeddings are ex-
pected to contain information crucial to premise selection. Our experiments show that
this information prevails through average pooling.

4.4   Unsupervised Problem Embedding
The supervised learning task emphasises the axiom nodes, but it might be advantageous
with a learning task encapsulating all the nodes in a graph. Alas, no sensible labels are
                                     Graph Sequence Learning for Premise Selection      9

directly derivable from the problems to train a prediction model. Thus, we employ un-
supervised training through a synthetic dataset which utilises a relation property encap-
sulating all graph nodes.
    The unsupervised training approach consists of training a matching model which
learns the difference between two graphs according to some relational property, as de-
scribed in [29]. The model takes two graphs, gi , gj , as input and passes them through
the Siamese GNN model, as illustrated in Figure 7. Next, the nodes of the embed-
ded graphs are pooled into two graph embedding vectors. The similarity of the two
input graphs is approximated as the vector norm between the two graph embeddings:
||GN N (gi ) − GN N (gj )||. Training the GNN in this fashion enables it to produce em-
beddings encompassing structural similarities and dissimilarities.




            Fig. 7. Unsupervised GNN training based on pairwise graph similarity.


    The synthetic dataset consists of pairs of undirected graphs and a numeric property
describing their relation. The relational property utilised is the Laplacian spectrum dis-
tance [34], which can be defined as follows. Given a graph G, the adjacency matrix A
represents the node connections in the graph. The diagonal degree matrix D of G rep-
resents the degree of each node, e.g. the number of neighbours. Further, the Laplacian
of the graph is defined as the degree matrix subtracted from the adjacency matrix:

                                       L=D−A
The eigenvalues λ1 ≤ . . . λi . . . ≤ λk of the Laplacian are given as Lx = λi x. Ac-
cordingly, the Laplacian spectrum distance π of two graphs G and G0 , is defined as:
                                          v
                                          u k
                                          uX
                                     0
                            π(G, G ) = t (λi − λ0i )2 ,
                                              i=1

where k ∈ min(n, m), and n and m are the numbers of nodes in G and G0 .
    The Laplacian spectrum distance is a computationally cheap metric, even for graphs
of the magnitude required to represent first-order problems. Although the metric encap-
sulates graph structure, it neither considers node types nor edge directions. Still, the
10       Holden & Korovin

distance provides an overall description of the structural similarity of the graphs and
considers all graph nodes.


5     Experimental Evaluation
This section describes the experimental results and evaluation of our premise selection
approach1 . First, we describe the dataset, followed by five experiments. The first exper-
iment investigates the performance of the graph embeddings2 . The second experiment
explores input orders, and the third investigates the effect of attention. The fourth ex-
periment explores decoder sampling methods, and the fifth is an online evaluation of
our approach and related methods.

5.1    Proof Dataset
We used the synthetic DeepMath [2] dataset for the model training and evaluation. It
consists of 32524 FOF problems based on proofs of the Mizar40 benchmark. Deep-
Math was created to evaluate binary premise selection methods. Hence, the number of
positive and “superfluous” axioms in a problem is balanced. The main advantages of
the dataset are a large number of problems combined with consistent formula naming
and the reuse of axioms across problems.
    We impose a maximum sequence limit of 20 axioms resulting in 30805 problems,
where 20% are used for testing, 8% for validation, and the rest for training. The vocab-
ulary consists of the 6K most common axioms occurring in the proofs of the training
set. The other axioms are mapped to the Out-Of-Vocabulary (OOV) and removed. Ta-
ble 2 displays the key statistics of each problem set. While many proofs contain rarely
occurring axioms, few problems are represented solely by OOV tokens.


                                                             Train Validation Test
            Number of problems                              22179         2465 6161
            Average sequence length                           8.96         9.14 9.10
            Median sequence length                            8.00         8.00 8.00
            Ratio of problems containing oov tokens           0.80         0.85 0.85
            Ratio of problems containing only oov tokens 0.05              0.06 0.07
                       Table 2. Key statistics of each dataset partition.




5.2    Experiment 1: Supervised vs Unsupervised Graph Embeddings
The goal of this experiment is to examine the pre-trained embedding methods. The
supervised approach was trained according to the methods in the original paper [24].
 1
     Experiments available at https://github.com/EdvardHolden/axiom_caption
 2
     Embedding computation available at https://github.com/EdvardHolden/
     gnn-entailment-caption
                                    Graph Sequence Learning for Premise Selection      11

The unsupervised approach was trained on 12000 graph pairs. The output of each GNN
is combined with one of the pooling mechanisms to produce a total of six embedding
variations. The captioning training parameters are shown in Table 3. The evaluation
metrics are defined as follows, where A is the set of predicted tokens, and B is the
ground truth:


                              |A ∩ B|                                   |A ∩ B|
         Jaccard(A, B) =                         Coverage(A, B) =
                              |A ∪ B|                                     |B|



                    Training Prameters               Model Parameters
             Optimiser                   Adam RNN Type                 LSTM
             Learning Rate               0.001 RNN Units               32
             Max Epochs                  80    Stateful RNN            True
             Early Stopping              5     Batch Normalisation     False
             Dropout Rate                0.1    Feature Normalisation True
             Teacher Forcing Rate        1.0    No Dense Units        512
             Batch Size                  64     Embedding Size        50
             Maximum Sequence Length 22         Target Vocab Size     6000
                  Table 3. The captioning model and training parameters.



     The results are presented in Table 4 and show that supervised embeddings perform
better than unsupervised embeddings. This indicates that a contextual learning task is
required to produce good embeddings. It also shows that the embeddings created by
pooling problem and premise nodes perform better, indicating that essential structures
persist through averaging. The results show issues with overfitting, but an increase in
the dropout rate led to a decrease in validation performance. On the other hand, un-
supervised learning is relatively less prone to overfitting. The following experiments
utilise the supervised problem embeddings.


                                                Train            Validation
              Method
                                          Jaccard Coverage Jaccard Coverage
                             Problem         0.40     0.50      0.23      0.32
              Supervised Premise             0.35     0.46      0.22      0.31
                             Conjecture      0.20     0.29      0.14      0.22
                             Problem         0.30     0.40      0.19      0.27
              Unsupervised Premise           0.20     0.32      0.15      0.25
                             Conjecture      0.18     0.29      0.14      0.22
       Table 4. The training and validation performance of the embedding approaches.
12      Holden & Korovin

5.3   Experiment 2: Axiom Order
This experiment examines various input ordering schemes. While the ATP treats the
axioms as a set, RNNs operate over input sequences. Therefore, some input orders may
be more advantageous. We explore the following ordering schemes:

 – Original: Ordered as in the original problem.
 – Length: Ordered the smallest string representation to the longest.
 – Frequency: Ordered from the most frequently occurring axioms to the least.
 – Random: Random order of axioms for each sequence.
 – Global Random: Static random order.

    The results are displayed in Table 5. Although most configurations perform simi-
larly, the length and frequency order have the best validation performance. However,
random ordering has a surprisingly low performance. As this is not reflected in the
other ordering schemes, including the global random order, it indicates that a consistent
relative position across sequences is essential.


                                            Train           Validation
                   Axiom Order
                                      Jaccard Coverage Jaccard Coverage
                   Original           0.40    0.50      0.23     0.32
                   Length             0.43    0.53      0.24     0.33
                   Frequency          0.39    0.49      0.24     0.33
                   Random             0.23    0.25      0.15     0.16
                   Global Random 0.39         0.49      0.22     0.31
       Table 5. The train and validation set performance on the different axiom orders.




5.4   Experiment 3: Attention Mechanisms
This experiment evaluates the impact of utilising an attention mechanism for the axiom
captioning method, The models were trained with the length order, and the results are
presented in Table 6. The results show that Loung dot attention can provide a minor
performance improvement.


                                        Train            Validation
                    Attention
                                  Jaccard Coverage Jaccard Coverage
                    None          0.43    0.53       0.24    0.33
                    Bahdanau      0.37    0.50       0.22    0.32
                    Loung concat 0.38     0.49       0.24    0.33
                    Loung dot     0.39    0.51       0.24    0.34
            Table 6. The performance of attention mechanisms and no attention.
                                    Graph Sequence Learning for Premise Selection      13

5.5    Experiment 4: Model Decoding

This experiment shifts the focus from optimising the training parameters toward the
premise selection task by examining sampling methods. Although the model is given
a single input token at each step, multiple tokens can be sampled from the output dis-
tribution. We explore three different sampling methods over the test set for selecting
which axioms to include in the final problem:

 – Greedy: Select n axioms with the maximum probability.
 – Top-K: Redistribute the probability distribution over the top K axioms, and sample
   n axioms from the new probability distribution.
 – Temperature: Scale the logits by the temperature prior to applying softmax and
   sample n axioms from the new probability distribution.

    At each generative step, the sampling method selects n axioms and adds them to the
set of the selected axiom. Only the top axiom is fed back into the model. The results
are displayed in Table 7. They show that the greedy sampling method is superior, and
the coverage score is monotonic on n. We found that an increase in coverage gives
a substantial improvement for online performance compared to a slight decrease in
Jaccard. Moreover, greedy sampling selects a small total number of axioms despite
producing the highest coverage scores. Through experimentation, we discovered that
achieving a high coverage score is crucial for solving the problems in this dataset.


                           1                       2                   4
                 Jaccard Coverage Size Jaccard Coverage Size Jaccard Coverage Size
 Greedy             0.29      0.39 6.71   0.22       0.52 12.82   0.15   0.64 24.25
 Top-32             0.16      0.30 9.07   0.12       0.43 19.92   0.09   0.58 37.86
 Top-64             0.16      0.29 9.13   0.11       0.43 20.36   0.08   0.57 39.46
 Top-128            0.16      0.29 9.20   0.11       0.42 20.59   0.08   0.56 40.17
 Top-256            0.15      0.29 9.21   0.11       0.42 20.64   0.08   0.56 40.40
 Temperature-1.0    0.15      0.28 9.22   0.14       0.38 15.40   0.11   0.50 27.77
 Temperature-0.9    0.17      0.30 8.78   0.16       0.40 14.33   0.12   0.51 25.37
 Temperature-0.8    0.19      0.32 8.42   0.18       0.41 13.27   0.13   0.51 23.10
 Temperature-0.5    0.25      0.37 7.49   0.24       0.43 10.60   0.17   0.50 17.15
                   Table 7. The performance of each sampling method.




5.6    Experiment 5: Online System Evaluation

The final experiment performs an online evaluation of our premise selection method and
other methods with the state-of-the-art ATP, iProver3 . During initial experimentation, it
was discovered that the Deepmath problems were too small for a meaningful assess-
ment as iProver solved 86% of the problems without premise selection. Therefore, the
 3
     iProver is available at:https://gitlab.com/korovin/iprover
14       Holden & Korovin

problems were extended by merging the Deepmath problems with the larger Mizar404
problems, reducing this ratio to 52%.
    Nine different premise selection configurations are utilised to generate problem ver-
sions used in the online evaluation. This consists of axiom captioning, SInE, no premise
selection, and three related axiom captioning methods. SInE is evaluated with tolerance-
depth parameters of (1, 1) and (3, 0), note that 0 corresponds to unbounded depth.
    In the case of axiom captioning, the model is trained on the 6K most common posi-
tive axioms in the benchmark. The positive axioms outside the vocabulary are essential
for the proofs but appear too rarely to be learnt by the model. Thus, these axioms are not
reachable for the captioning model. Consequently, our axiom captioning method imple-
ments a “rare-axiom” procedure for selecting rare but valuable axioms. The procedure
scans a given problem and selects any axioms that have previously appeared positively
but rarely. Furthermore, it is unlikely that a single method can encapsulate all aspects of
the conjecture-axiom relationship. Hence, we also evaluate the combination of axiom
captioning and SInE as two complementing approaches.
    Further, we evaluate three related ML-based methods for premise selection: Binary
Graph [24], Conjecture RNN [22] and the Conjecture Transformer [23]. The Binary
Graph method is used to compute the supervised embeddings, and the comparison will
therefore reveal whether axiom captioning improves the utilisation of the graph em-
beddings. Still, the method expects a balanced dataset and will likely introduce much
positive bias for larger problems. Conjecture RNN is a sequence-to-sequence approach
where the input is a tokenised embedding of the conjecture. A caveat with this approach
is that it trains on a specific axiom order derived from the proofs unavailable for this
dataset. Hence, it is trained on the consistent “length” order (see, Section 5.3). The
approach utilises an LSTM architecture but puts no restriction on the input and out-
put vocabulary, resulting in poor training performance on this dataset. The Conjecture
Transformer approach is an extension where the RNNs are replaced with the Trans-
former [32] architecture. This approach was modified slightly in the input and output
layers to enforce input length restrictions and OOV tokens. The Conjecture* approaches
rely solely on the token vocabulary and do not inspect the given problem. Hence, their
encoders are unaware of the increased problem size.
    iProver is run with a default heuristic over the clausified problem versions gener-
ated by each configuration with a time limit of 10 seconds. The results are displayed in
Figure 8. Conjecture RNN only solves one problem selecting only the most frequently
occurring axiom. The “Conjecture Transformer” slightly improves the performance but
does not come close to axiom captioning. This suggests that graph embeddings are su-
perior to conjecture token embeddings for premise selection. Binary Graph performs
best of the related methods and is close to the performance of SInE (1, 1). However, it
suffers from generating large problems with many superfluous axioms and a low cov-
erage score due to being a binary classifier trained on a balanced dataset. Nevertheless,
half of the problems solved by Binary Graph complement the solution of axiom cap-
tioning. Hence, graph embeddings facilitate method diversification.

 4
     Problems are available at http://grid01.ciirc.cvut.cz/˜mptp/7.13.01_4.
     181.1147/mptp/problems_small_consist.tar.gz
                                     Graph Sequence Learning for Premise Selection           15

    Axiom caption outperforms the related ML-based methods and is slightly enhanced
by its combination with SInE (1, 1). However, it is behind SInE (3, 0), which performs
nearly identically to no premise selection (Original). The real power of axiom caption-
ing comes through when paired with SInE (3, 0). Axiom captioning considers axioms
carefully and consequently predicts many of the essential axioms. On the other hand,
SInE (3, 0) selects many axioms, resulting in reasonable coverage scores. Hence, their
combination results in axiom selection with sufficiently large coverage scores while
maintaining a computationally feasible size. The result is a method which solves 17.7%
more problems than the baseline, which does not employ premise selection.




    Fig. 8. Online evaluation of SInE, Captioning, their combination, and related methods.




6   Conclusion

In this paper, we presented a novel approach for performing premise selection. It par-
allels image captioning, combining transfer learning on graph neural networks with
sequence learning. The graph representation provides a holistic view of the problem
structure, while the sequence model uses this embedding to predict the sequence of ax-
ioms necessary for the proof. Our evaluation found that the model performs better when
the GNN is pre-trained on a related and supervised task with embeddings containing in-
formation of all the nodes in the graph. Further, we observed that effective axiom cap-
tioning requires a fixed axiom order and a greedy decoder sampler. Lastly, the proposed
approach dramatically increases the number of solved problems when complemented
with SInE and significantly outperforms related machine learning methods.


Acknowledgements

We thank Michael Rawson for providing a translator from formulas to graphs, utilised
in this work.
16       Holden & Korovin

References
 1. Jesse Alama, Tom Heskes, Daniel Kühlwein, Evgeni Tsivtsivadze, and Josef Urban. Premise
    selection for mathematics by corpus analysis and kernel methods. J. Autom. Reason.,
    52(2):191–213, 2014.
 2. A. A. Alemi, F. Chollet, G. Irving, C. Szegedy, and J. Urban. Deepmath - deep sequence
    models for premise selection. CoRR, abs/1606.04442, 2016.
 3. D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align
    and translate, 2014.
 4. Filip Bártek and Martin Suda. Neural precedence recommender. In André Platzer and Geoff
    Sutcliffe, editors, Automated Deduction - CADE 28 - 28th International Conference on Au-
    tomated Deduction, Virtual Event, July 12-15, 2021, Proceedings, volume 12699 of Lecture
    Notes in Computer Science, pages 525–542. Springer, 2021.
 5. André Duarte and Konstantin Korovin. Implementing superposition in iProver (system de-
    scription). In Nicolas Peltier and Viorica Sofronie-Stokkermans, editors, Automated Rea-
    soning - 10th International Joint Conference, IJCAR, Proceedings, Part II, volume 12167 of
    Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 388–397. Springer, 2020.
 6. Michael Färber, Cezary Kaliszyk, and Josef Urban. Machine learning guidance for connec-
    tion tableaux. J. Autom. Reason., 65(2):287–320, 2021.
 7. J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl. Neural message passing
    for quantum chemistry. CoRR, abs/1704.01212, 2017.
 8. Zarathustra Amadeus Goertzel, Karel Chvalovský, Jan Jakubuv, Miroslav Olsák, and Josef
    Urban. Fast and slow enigmas and parental guidance. In Boris Konev and Giles Reger,
    editors, Frontiers of Combining Systems - 13th International Symposium, FroCoS 2021,
    Birmingham, UK, September 8-10, 2021, Proceedings, volume 12941 of Lecture Notes in
    Computer Science, pages 173–191. Springer, 2021.
 9. Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation,
    9:1735–80, 12 1997.
10. K. Hoder and A. Voronkov. Sine qua non for large theory reasoning. In N. Bjørner and
    V. Sofronie-Stokkermans, editors, Automated Deduction - CADE-23, volume 6803 of LNCS,
    pages 299–314. Springer, 2011.
11. Edvard K. Holden and Konstantin Korovin. Heterogeneous heuristic optimisation and
    scheduling for first-order theorem proving. In Fairouz Kamareddine and Claudio Sacerdoti
    Coen, editors, Intelligent Computer Mathematics - 14th International Conference, CICM
    2021, Timisoara, Romania, July 26-31, 2021, Proceedings, volume 12833 of Lecture Notes
    in Computer Science, pages 107–123. Springer, 2021.
12. Jan Jakubuv and Josef Urban. Blistrtune: Hierarchical invention of theorem proving strate-
    gies. CoRR, abs/1611.08733, 2016.
13. C. Kaliszyk and J. Urban. Mizar 40 for mizar 40. J. Autom. Reason., 55(3):245–256, 2015.
14. Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional
    networks, 2016.
15. K. Korovin. iProver - an instantiation-based theorem prover for first-order logic (system
    description). In IJCAR 2008. Proceedings, pages 292–298, 2008.
16. L. Kovács and A. Voronkov. First-order theorem proving and Vampire. In N. Sharygina and
    H. Veith, editors, Computer Aided Verification CAV. Proceedings, volume 8044 of LNCS,
    pages 1–35. Springer, 2013.
17. A. S. Kucik and K. Korovin. Premise selection with neural networks and distributed repre-
    sentation of features. CoRR, abs/1807.10268, 2018.
18. Minh-Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D. Manning. Effective approaches to
    attention-based neural machine translation. CoRR, abs/1508.04025, 2015.
                                       Graph Sequence Learning for Premise Selection          17

19. J. Meng and L. C. Paulson. Lightweight relevance filtering for machine-generated resolution
    problems. J. Appl. Log., 7(1):41–57, 2009.
20. L. C. Paulson and J. C. Blanchette. Three years of experience with sledgehammer, a practical
    link between automatic and interactive theorem provers. In G. Sutcliffe, S. Schulz, and
    E. Ternovska, editors, The 8th International Workshop on the Implementation of Logics,
    2011, volume 2 of EPiC Series in Computing, pages 1–11. EasyChair, 2010.
21. B. Piotrowski and J. Urban. ATPboost: Learning premise selection in binary setting with atp
    feedback, 2018.
22. B. Piotrowski and J. Urban. Stateful premise selection by recurrent neural networks. In
    E. Albert and L. Kovács, editors, LPAR 2020: 23rd International Conference on Logic for
    Programming, Artificial Intelligence and Reasoning, May 22-27, 2020, volume 73 of EPiC
    Series in Computing, pages 409–422. EasyChair, 2020.
23. K. Prorokovic, M. Wand, and J. Schmidhuber. Improving stateful premise selection with
    transformers. In F. Kamareddine and C. Sacerdoti Coen, editors, Intelligent Computer
    Mathematics - 14th International Conference, CICM, volume 12833 of LNCS, pages 84–
    89. Springer, 2021.
24. M. Rawson and G. Reger. Directed graph networks for logical reasoning. In P. Fontaine,
    K. Korovin, I. S. Kotsireas, P. Rümmer, and S. Tourret, editors, 7th Workshop on Practical
    Aspects of Automated Reasoning (PAAR), volume 2752 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings,
    pages 109–119, 2020.
25. Michael Rawson and Giles Reger. Dynamic strategy priority: Empower the strong and aban-
    don the weak. In Boris Konev, Josef Urban, and Philipp Rümmer, editors, Proceedings of
    the 6th Workshop on Practical Aspects of Automated Reasoning co-located with Federated
    Logic Conference 2018 (FLoC 2018), Oxford, UK, July 19th, 2018, volume 2162 of CEUR
    Workshop Proceedings, pages 58–71. CEUR-WS.org, 2018.
26. Simon Schäfer and Stephan Schulz. Breeding theorem proving heuristics with genetic algo-
    rithms. In Georg Gottlob, Geoff Sutcliffe, and Andrei Voronkov, editors, Global Conference
    on Artificial Intelligence, GCAI 2015, Tbilisi, Georgia, October 16-19, 2015, volume 36 of
    EPiC Series in Computing, pages 263–274. EasyChair, 2015.
27. S. Schulz. System description: E 1.8. In K. L. McMillan, A. Middeldorp, and A. Voronkov,
    editors, LPAR-19, volume 8312 of LNCS, pages 735–743. Springer, 2013.
28. Alexander Steen and Christoph Benzmüller. The higher-order prover leo-iii. In Didier
    Galmiche, Stephan Schulz, and Roberto Sebastiani, editors, Automated Reasoning - 9th In-
    ternational Joint Conference, IJCAR 2018, Held as Part of the Federated Logic Conference,
    FloC 2018, Oxford, UK, July 14-17, 2018, Proceedings, volume 10900 of Lecture Notes in
    Computer Science, pages 108–116. Springer, 2018.
29. StellarGraph. Unsupervised graph classification/representation learning via distances. Stel-
    larGraph 1.2.1 documentation, 2022.
30. M. Tanti, A. Gatt, and K. P. Camilleri. Where to put the image in an image caption generator.
    CoRR, abs/1703.09137, 2017.
31. J. Urban. MPTP 0.2: Design, implementation, and initial experiments. J. Autom. Reason.,
    37(1-2):21–43, 2006.
32. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N.
    Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need, 2017.
33. C. Weidenbach, D. Dimova, A. Fietzke, R. Kumar, M. Suda, and P. Wischnewski. SPASS
    version 3.5. In Renate A. Schmidt, editor, Automated Deduction - CADE-22. Proceedings,
    volume 5663 of LNCS, pages 140–145. Springer, 2009.
34. Peter Wills and Franç ois G. Meyer. Metrics for graph comparison: A practitioner’s guide.
    PLOS ONE, 15(2):e0228728, feb 2020.
35. K. Xu, J. Ba, R. Kiros, K. Cho, A. Courville, R. Salakhutdinov, R. Zemel, and Y. Bengio.
    Show, attend and tell: Neural image caption generation with visual attention, 2015.
